                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               DEMOGRAPHICS, WEALTH, AND GLOBAL IMBALANCES
                      IN THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY

                                       Adrien Auclert
                                      Hannes Malmberg
                                      Frederic Martenet
                                      Matthew Rognlie

                                     Working Paper 29161
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w29161


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2021




For helpful comments, we thank Mark Aguiar, Anmol Bhandari, Olivier Blanchard, Maricristina
De Nardi, Charles Goodhart, Nezih Guner, Fatih Guvenen, Daniel Harenberg, Martin Holm,
Gregor Jarosch, Patrick Kehoe, Pete Klenow, Dirk Krueger, Kieran Larkin, Ellen McGrattan,
Kurt Mitman, Ben Moll, Serdar Ozkan, Christina Patterson, Alessandra Peter, Jacob Robbins,
Richard Rogerson, Ananth Seshadri, Isaac Sorkin, Kjetil Storesletten, Ludwig Straub, Amir Sufi,
Chris Tonetti, Arlene Wong, Owen Zidar and Nathan Zorzi. We also thank Etienne Gagnon
and John Sabelhaus for sharing code and data. This research is supported by the Hellman
Faculty Scholar Fund Grant at Stanford. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Adrien Auclert, Hannes Malmberg, Frederic Martenet, and Matthew Rognlie. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Demographics, Wealth, and Global Imbalances in the Twenty-First Century
Adrien Auclert, Hannes Malmberg, Frederic Martenet, and Matthew Rognlie
NBER Working Paper No. 29161
August 2021
JEL No. E21,F21,J11

                                          ABSTRACT

We use a sufficient statistic approach to quantify the general equilibrium effects of population
aging on wealth accumulation, expected asset returns, and global imbalances. Combining
population forecasts with household survey data from 25 countries, we measure the
compositional effect of aging: how a changing age distribution affects wealth-to-GDP, holding
the age profiles of assets and labor income fixed. In a baseline overlapping generations model this
statistic, in conjunction with cross-sectional information and two standard macro parameters, pins
down general equilibrium outcomes. Since the compositional effect is positive, large, and
heterogeneous across countries, our model predicts that population aging will increase wealth-to-
GDP ratios, lower asset returns, and widen global imbalances through the twenty-first century.
These conclusions extend to a richer model in which bequests, individual savings, and the tax-
and-transfer system all respond to demographic change.

Adrien Auclert                                   Frederic Martenet
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Stanford University                              Stanford University
579 Jane Stanford Way                            579 Jane Stanford Way
Stanford, CA 94305                               Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER                                         martenet@stanford.edu
aauclert@stanford.edu
                                                 Matthew Rognlie
Hannes Malmberg                                  Department of Economics
University of Minnesota                          Northwestern University
2517 Humboldt Avenue South                       2211 Campus Drive
Unit A                                           Evanston, IL 60208
Minneapolis, MN 55405                            and NBER
pmalmber@umn.edu                                 matthew.rognlie@northwestern.edu




A appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w29161
1     Introduction
The world is experiencing rapid demographic change. The average share of the pop-
ulation above 50 years of age has increased from 15% to 25% since the 1950s, and it is
expected to rise further to 40% by the end of the twenty-first century (Figure 1, Panel A).
There is a widespread view that this aging process has been an important driver of three
key macroeconomic trends to date. According to this view, an aging population saves
more, helping to explain why wealth-to-GDP ratios have risen and average rates of re-
turn have fallen (Figure 1, Panels B and C).1 Insofar as this mechanism is heterogeneous
across countries, it can further explain the rise of global imbalances (Figure 1, Panel D).
   Beyond this qualitative consensus lies substantial disagreement about magnitudes.
For instance, structural estimates of the effect of demographics on interest rates over the
1970­2015 period range from a moderate decline of less than 100 basis points (Gagnon,
Johannsen and López-Salido 2021) to a large decline of over 300 basis points (Eggerts-
son, Mehrotra and Robbins 2019).2 Turning to predictions for the future, economists are
starkly divided about the direction of the effect. Some structural models predict falling
interest rates going forward (e.g. Gagnon et al. 2021, Papetti 2019). At the same time, an
influential hypothesis argues, based on the dissaving of the elderly, that aging will even-
tually push savings rates down and interest rates back up. This argument, popular in the
1990s as the "asset market meltdown" hypothesis (Poterba 2001, Abel 2001), was recently
revived under the name "great demographic reversal" (Goodhart and Pradhan 2020). In
the words of ECB chief economist Philip Lane (Lane 2020):

       The current phase of population ageing is contributing to the trend decline
       in the underlying equilibrium real interest rate [...] While a large population
       cohort that is saving for retirement puts upward pressure on the total sav-
       ings rate, a large elderly cohort may push down aggregate savings by running
       down accumulated wealth.

   In this paper, we refute the great demographic reversal and show that, instead, demo-
graphics will continue to push strongly in the same direction, leading to falling rates of
return and rising wealth-to-GDP ratios. We find that the key force is the compositional effect
    1 We focus primarily on the expected return on total wealth, which we proxy historically by calculating
the average return on total wealth, excluding changes in asset valuations. We will often refer to this measure
as the "interest rate"; it has been declining since the 1950s. As is well known, safe rates of return have also
fallen, though their fall is most pronounced since the 1980s. Appendix A provides more details.
    2 Appendix F presents a selective summary of findings in the literature and shows how to interpret them

through the lens of this paper's framework.



                                                      2
   A. Share of 50+ year-olds                                                 B. Private wealth-to-GDP ratios
                         60     USA                                                             USA          DEU
                                IND                                                             IND          JPN
                                                                                        500
 % of total population


                         50     CHN                                                             CHN
                                DEU
                                                                                        400




                                                                             % of GDP
                         40     JPN
                                World
                         30                                                             300

                         20                                                             200

                         10                                                             100
                         1950           2000          2050        2100                   1950         1970        1990      2010
                                               Year                                                           Year
   C. Ex-ante real returns                                                   D. Net international investment positions
                         10                                                              60     USA          DEU
                                Safe return       Total return
                                                                                                IND          JPN
                          8                                                              40     CHN
                                                                             % of GDP
                          6                                                              20
 %




                          4                                                               0

                          2                                                              20

                          0                                                              40
                         1950           1970        1990         2010                    1980         1990     2000      2010
                                                Year                                                          Year

                                Figure 1: Demographics, wealth, interest rates and global imbalances
Notes: Panel A presents the share of 50+ year-olds from 1950 to 2100 as predicted by the 2019 UN World
Population Prospects. Panel B presents private wealth-to-GDP ratios from the World Inequality Database
(WID). The red line for India shows the national wealth-to-GDP ratio, since the WID does not provide data
on private wealth. Panel C presents a measure of the US total return on wealth (orange line) and of the US
safe rate of return (red line). Details on the construction of these series are in appendix A. Panel D presents
net international investment positions normalized by GDP, taken from the IMF.


of an aging population: the direct impact of the changing age distribution on wealth-to-
GDP, holding the age profiles of assets and labor income fixed. In a baseline overlapping
generations (OLG) model, this is a sufficient statistic for the actual change in wealth-to-
GDP for a small open economy. Further, for a world economy, the compositional effect--
when aggregated across countries, and combined with elasticities of asset supply and
demand that we obtain with other sufficient statistic formulas--fully pins down the gen-
eral equilibrium effect on wealth-to-GDP, asset returns, and global imbalances.
    We measure the compositional effect by combining population forecasts with house-


                                                                         3
hold survey data from 25 countries over the period 2016­2100. We find that it is positive
and large everywhere, but also heterogeneous, ranging from an increase in wealth-to-
GDP of 48pp in Hungary to 327pp in India. Since the average effect is positive and large,
our model shows that there will be no great demographic reversal: through the twenty-
first century, population aging will continue to push down global rates of return, with
our central estimate being -123bp, and push up global wealth-to-GDP, with our central
estimate being a 10% increase, or 47pp in levels. Since the effect is heterogeneous across
countries, our model predicts that demographics will also generate large global imbal-
ances. For instance, we find that India's net foreign asset position will steadily grow until
it reaches 100% of GDP in 2100, while the United States's net foreign asset position will
decline to absorb this demand for assets.
   Our sufficient statistic framework offers a transparent way to compute the effect of
a changing age distribution on key macroeconomic variables. General equilibrium out-
comes can be obtained with a limited amount of information: in addition to the data
needed for the compositional effect, we only need data on macroeconomic aggregates
and assumptions on two standard macro parameters, the elasticity of intertemporal sub-
stitution and the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor. Our framework also
clarifies a key limitation of the great demographic reversal hypothesis, which focuses on
the decline in one flow (savings) when another (investment) is also declining due to de-
mographic change. In contrast, the compositional effect on stocks (rising wealth-to-GDP)
unambiguously implies a falling rate of return.
    Our baseline model allows for a broad range of savings motives, but rules out some
mechanisms through which population aging can affect behavior. To evaluate how much
these can matter, we numerically simulate a richer model in which bequests, individual
savings, and the tax-and-transfer system all respond to demographic change. We find
that the results are always the same qualitatively, and that with one exception--extreme
fiscal adjustments that fall entirely either on tax increases or benefit cuts--they are also
close quantitatively to those we obtain directly from our sufficient statistic methodology.
    Existing literature has followed two broad approaches, which our paper combines,
to quantify the impact of demographic change on macroeconomic outcomes. The first
is reduced-form. One branch of this literature, following Mankiw and Weil (1989) and
Poterba (2001), computes the effect of a changing age distribution over fixed asset pro-
files.3 Another branch, following Cutler, Poterba, Sheiner, Summers and Akerlof (1990)
   3 There  is also a tradition that computes the effect of changing age distributions over fixed age profiles of
savings rates (Summers and Carroll 1987, Auerbach and Kotlikoff 1990, Bosworth, Burtless and Sabelhaus
1991). This calculation is subject to measurement error and may not give the correct sign of the effect on
rates of return, as we show in section 5.


                                                       4
and the "demographic dividend" literature (Bloom, Canning and Sevilla 2003), computes
the effect of changing age distributions over fixed income profiles. These "shift-share"
calculations are very intuitive, but are not tied to specific general equilibrium counterfac-
tuals. We show that a particular ratio of two such shift-shares is the main determinant of
equilibrium outcomes in a fully specified OLG model.
   The alternative approach is structural, relying on quantitative general equilibrium
OLG models. This tradition, which originated in Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987), has
tackled effects of demographics on aggregate wealth accumulation,4 asset returns,5 and
international capital flows.6 Our contribution here is to trace quantitative results back to
primitive elasticities, and to the calibration moments that are relevant for the counterfac-
tual of interest. One benefit of this approach is that it can identify the source of conflicting
estimates: for instance, the compositional effect in Gagnon et al. (2021) is about the same
as in the data, while that in Eggertsson et al. (2019) is about triple that in the data.
    In this paper, we focus on the causal effect of projected demographic change in the
twenty-first century. We do not explain the underlying sources of this change; instead,
we take demographic projections as given. We also rule out some indirect effects of ag-
ing, such as changes in total factor productivity or market structure, which are difficult
for us to quantify.7 Although our baseline exercise holds government debt-to-GDP pol-
icy fixed, we show how rising government debt can mitigate or even undo the effect of
demographic change on real interest rates, while increasing the effect on wealth-to-GDP.8
   The compositional effects we identify are large, both in the past and in the future. This
suggests that demographic change is an important force behind macroeconomic trends.
Of course, other developments have also played a major role historically, and our focus
on the causal effect of demographic change should not be interpreted as ruling them out.9
   The paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, we describe our baseline model and define
   4 e.g. Imrohoro
                    glu,
                         Imrohoro
                                     and Joines (1995), Kotlikoff, Smetters and Walliser (1999), De Nardi,
                                    glu
Imrohoroglu and Sargent (2001), and Kitao (2014).
   5 e.g. Abel (2003), Geanakoplos, Magill and Quinzii (2004), Carvalho, Ferrero and Nechio (2016), Eg-

gertsson et al. (2019), Lisack, Sajedi and Thwaites (2017), Jones (2018), Papetti (2019), Rachel and Summers
(2019), Kopecky and Taylor (2020), and Gagnon et al. (2021).
   6 e.g. Henriksen (2002), Börsch-Supan, Ludwig and Winter (2006), Domeij and Flodén (2006), Krueger

and Ludwig (2007), Backus, Cooley and Henriksen (2014), and Bárány, Coeurdacier and Guibaud (2019).
   7 For the effects of population aging on TFP, see the debate between Maestas, Mullen and Powell (2016)

and Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017). For models in which demographics can affect markups via either the
structure of consumer demand or firm entry incentives, see Bornstein (2020) vs. Peters and Walsh (2019).
   8 Our quantitative model also shows that increasing the retirement age increases interest rates and re-

duces wealth-to-GDP, though the magnitude is likely to be modest in practice.
   9 These forces include falling TFP growth, rising inequality, changing risk or liquidity premia, and rising

markups. See, for instance, Rachel and Smith (2015), Eggertsson et al. (2019), Auclert and Rognlie (2018),
Straub (2019), Farhi and Gourio (2018), and Eggertsson, Robbins and Wold (2018).



                                                      5
the compositional effect. We show that the effect of aging on wealth-to-GDP in a small
open economy exactly coincides with the compositional effect, and that world equilib-
rium outcomes can be obtained by combining this effect with elasticities of asset supply
and demand for which we also derive sufficient statistic formulas. In section 3, we turn
to measurement, documenting large and heterogeneous compositional effects across 25
countries for 2016­2100, and calculating their general equilibrium implications. In sec-
tion 4, we extend the baseline model to capture additional macroeconomic effects of pop-
ulation aging and show that the results from section 3 are a close fit in nearly all cases.
Finally, in section 5 we explain why the great demographic reversal hypothesis's focus on
savings rates is incomplete: although demographic forces will indeed push down net sav-
ings rates, this will be overwhelmed by an even larger decline in net investment, leading
to a decrease in equilibrium rates of return.


2     The compositional effect of demographics
In this section, we set up a benchmark life-cycle model with overlapping generations to
study the effects of demographic change. We derive two main theoretical results. First, in
a small open economy, demographic change only affects macroeconomic aggregates by
changing the age composition of the population. Given a demographic projection, these
compositional effects can be calculated using data from a single cross-section. Second, in
an integrated world economy, the long-run effects of demographic change on wealth ac-
cumulation, interest rates, and global imbalances can be obtained by simply combining
these compositional effects with macroeconomic aggregates, other cross-sectional statis-
tics, and assumptions about two primitive elasticities.


2.1   Environment
Our environment is a world economy with overlapping generations (OLG) of hetero-
geneous individuals. Time is discrete and runs from t = 0 to ·, agents have perfect
foresight, and capital markets are integrated. Apart from the global return on assets,
all variables and parameters are allowed to vary across countries. Country indices are
dropped unless there is a risk of ambiguity.


Individuals. At each time t, a country has a population Nt = Â j Njt growing at rate
1 + nt  Nt / Nt 1 , with Njt being the number of individuals of age j. Each individual
faces an exogenous probability fj of surviving from age j to age j + 1, so the probability


                                            6
                                                                j 1
of surviving from birth to age j is F j  'k=0 fk . The maximal lifespan is J , so that f J = 0.
For now, we assume that this survival profile is constant over time, and that there is no
                                               N
migration. Hence, the age distribution, p jt  Njt t
                                                    , only varies over time due to changes in
fertility and convergence dynamics.10
    Individuals supply labor exogenously, face idiosyncratic income risk, and can par-
tially self-insure and smooth income over their life cycle by saving in an annuity. Their
effective labor supply is `(z j ), where z j is a stochastic process. Unless stated otherwise,
all individual variables at age j are a function of the whole history of the idiosyncratic
shocks z j , which we denote z j .
    Individuals with birth year k choose sequences of consumption c jt and annuities a j+1,t+1
for all ages j = 0, . . . , J (with t = j + k) to solve the utility maximization problem
                                                     2                       1
                                                                                 3
                                                                       1
                                                     6
                                                          J           c jt   s
                                                                                 7
                                  max             Ek 4 Â b j F j             1   5
                             {c jt ,a j+1,t+1 }          j =0         1      s
                                                                                            
                 s.t.   c jt + fj a j+1,t+1  wt (1                    t )`(z j ) + tr (z j ) + (1 + rt )a jt   (1)

                                  a j+1,t+1                ¯ Zt ,
                                                           a

      ¯ is a borrowing constraint, wt is the real wage per efficiency unit of labor at time t,
where a
rt is the return on wealth, t is the labor tax rate, and tr (z j ) denotes transfers from the gov-
ernment, including wage-indexed social insurance and retirement transfers, for agents
of age j with a history z j . The utility weight at age j is b j F j , combining the survival
probability F j and an arbitrary age-specific utility shifter b j . Deviations from exponen-
tial discounting ( b j = b j for some b) stand in for age-dependent factors that affect the
marginal utility of consumption, such as health status or the presence of children. Hence,
this model can capture many of the factors that the literature considers essential to un-
derstand savings: agents save for life-cycle reasons, for self-insurance reasons, to cover
future health costs, and to provide for their children.11
     The total wealth held by individuals of age j is the product of Njt and the average
wealth at age j, a jt  Ea jt . Aggregate (private) wealth Wt is the sum across age groups:
  10 Convergence    dynamics for demographics are sometimes called "momentum". Appendix B.1 shows
that that fertility and momentum together account for the majority of population aging during the US
demographic transition between 1950 and 2100. Changing mortality and migration contribute to a more
limited extent, though their importance rises during the latter part of the transition.
  11 We assume that children live with one of their parents, whose consumption c at age j includes that of
                                                                                     j
the children they care for. Formally, we set b j = `(z j ) = tr (z j ) = 0 when j  J w , for a J w that denotes
the start of working life independent from parents. Given this assumption, children do not consume or
accumulate assets until age J w .


                                                                  7
                                                     J
                                         Wt      Â Njt a jt .                                (2)
                                                 j =0


Production.  There is a single good used for private consumption, government con-
sumption, and investment. The final output Yt of this good is produced competitively
from physical capital Kt and effective labor input Lt according to an aggregate produc-
tion function F
                                        Yt = F (Kt , Zt Lt ),

where Zt  Z0 (1 + g)t captures labor-augmenting technological progress. We assume
that F has constant returns to scale and diminishing returns to each factor. Effective labor
input Lt is a standard linear aggregator

                                                 J
                                         Lt =   Â Njt E` j ,                                 (3)
                                                j =0


where E ` j denotes average effective labor input per person of age j, capturing variations
in experience and hours of work over the life cycle. Capital has a law of motion Kt+1 =
(1 d)Kt + It where It is aggregate investment, and factor prices equal marginal products.
The net rental rate of capital is rt = FK (Kt /( Zt Lt ), 1) d, and the wage per efficiency unit
of labor is wt = Zt FL (Kt /( Zt Lt ), 1).
    We write gt  Yt /Yt 1 1 for the growth rate of the economy. With a constant rt and
a stationary population, gt = (1 + g)(1 + n) 1. Otherwise, gt also reflects changes in
capital intensity and the composition of the population.


Government. The government purchases Gt goods, maintains a constant tax rate on la-
bor income t , gives individuals state-contingent transfers tr (z j ) indexed to current wages
wt , and finances itself using a risk-free bond with real interest rate rt . It faces the flow
budget constraint

                             J                                   J
                  Gt + wt   Â Njt Etr j + (1 + rt ) Bt = t wt Â Njt E` j + Bt+1,             (4)
                            j =0                                j =0


where a positive Bt denotes government borrowing. When demographic change disturbs
the balance of aggregate tax receipts and expenditures, the government adjusts Gt to en-
                                   Bt
sure that the debt-to-output ratio Yt
                                      follows a given, exogenous, time path.




                                                     8
Equilibrium.     Given demographics, government policy, an initial distribution of assets,
and initial levels of bonds and capital across countries such that FK d is equal to r0 in
each country, an equilibrium is a sequence of returns {rt } and country-level allocations
such that, in each country, individuals optimize, firms optimize, and asset demand from
individuals equals asset supply from firms and governments,

                                           Â Wtc = Â(Ktc + Btc ).
                                            c           c

   Dividing by world GDP Yt , the above expression can be written as
                                                           c
                                       Ytc Wtc         Ytc Kt    c
                                                                Bt
                                     Â Yt Yc =       Â Yt Yc Yc .
                                                              +                                     (5)
                                     c      t        c      t    t

Defining a country's net foreign asset position as the excess of wealth over capital and
bonds, NFAc t  Wt
                   c      c + Bc ), (5) states that the average NFA-to-GDP ratio is zero,
                       ( Kt    t
when countries are weighted by their by GDP.


2.2    A small economy aging alone
We first study a small open economy undergoing demographic change, while all other
countries have constant demographic parameters. In this case, the economy faces a global
rate of return r which is exogenous and fixed--exogenous because the economy is small,
and fixed since all other countries have fixed demography. This can be seen as the limit
                                                                    Yc
case when the economy has an arbitrarily small world GDP weight Ytt , so that its demand
and supply of assets do not affect the world equilibrium condition (5).12 By studying
this case, we can analyze how demographics affect macroeconomic aggregates directly,
independent of any effects operating through equilibrium adjustments in returns rt .
    We focus on wealth, and our key finding is that demographic change does not affect
the wealth levels within age groups, only the distribution of the population across age
groups. Formally, the economy exhibits what we call balanced growth by age, where the
full distribution of wealth within every age group grows at a constant rate.

Lemma 1. For any fixed r, a small open economy eventually reaches a balanced growth path by
age on which, for each age j, the full distribution of wealth holdings grows at the same rate g as
  12 To obtain a fixed interest rate, we assume that all other countries c0
                                                                    6= c are in demographic steady-state
given a set of mortality profiles fc
                                   j and a common growth rate of newborns n, where the constant growth
rate ensures that countries preserve their relative size over time.




                                                        9
technology. In particular, average wealth at age j satisfies

                                              a jt
                                                   = a j (r ).                                      (6)
                                              Zt

for sufficiently large t and some function a j (r ). If initial asset holdings reflect optimal choices
given the fixed r (in which case a j0 / Z0 = a j (r )), the economy starts on this balanced growth path,
and equation (6) holds for all t and j.

Proof. See appendix B.2.

   The lemma follows since demographic change does not affect the parameters of indi-
viduals' life-cycle problems, once these problems are normalized by productivity. Hence,
individuals born at different times make the same normalized asset choices given their
age, state, and asset holdings. As the influence of initial asset holdings recedes, we reach
a balanced growth path by age. Further, if initial assets are consistent with optimization
given r, we start on this balanced growth path. In that case, which we assume from now
on, we have a jt = (1 + g)t a j0 for all t.
   Given lemma 1, aggregate wealth per person satisfies

                                Wt
                                Nt
                                   =    Â p jt a jt = (1 + g)t Â p jt a j0                          (7)
                                         j                        j


Wealth per person changes with the age composition p jt of the population, and otherwise
grows at the technological growth rate 1 + g.
   We next derive output per person. A constant global r implies a constant ratio of
capital to effective labor k(r ), defined by FK (k (r ), 1) = r + d. Aggregate output is then
Yt = Zt Lt F (k (r ), 1), where, from (3), aggregate effective labor is Lt = Nt Â j p jt E ` j . Hence

                                Yt
                                   = Zt F (k(r ), 1) Â p jt E ` j
                                Nt                   j
                                        F ( k (r ), 1)
                                    =                  (1 + g)t Â p jt h j0                         (8)
                                        FL (k(r ), 1)           j


where h j0 = Z0 FL E ` j = w0 E ` j is equal to average labor earnings of individuals of age j,
and we have used the fact that the initial wage is w0 = Z0 FL (k (r ), 1).
   Taking the ratio of (7) and (8), we find that Wt /Yt is proportional to the ratio of Â j p jt a j0
and Â j p jt h j0 . The following proposition summarizes this result.




                                                    10
Proposition 1. On the balanced growth path by age, the wealth-to-GDP ratio satisfies

                                              Wt   Â p jt a j0
                                                 µ             ,                                                    (9)
                                              Yt   Â p jt h j0

where h j0  E w0 ` j is average pre-tax labor income by age, and a j0  Ea jt is average asset
holdings by age.

     The proposition implies that all changes in Wt /Yt reflect the changing age composition
p jt of the population, given fixed age profiles a j0 and h j0 . Equation (9) implies that the log
change in wealth to GDP between year 0 and year t is given by
                                                                    !                             !
                   Wt               W0                Â p jt a j0                   Â p j0 a j0         comp
          log              log              = log                       log                            Dt      .   (10)
                   Yt               Y0                Â p jt h j0                   Â p j0 h j0

                                                      comp
The key feature of equation (10) is that Dt       can be calculated from demographic pro-
jections and cross-sectional data alone, with demographic projections providing p jt and
                                                        comp
cross-sectional data providing a j0 and h j0 . We call Dt    the compositional effect of aging
on Wt /Yt . Proposition 1 shows that, for a small open economy, this equals the log change
                                           comp
in Wt /Yt . The next section shows that Dt      also plays a key role in an integrated world
economy.


2.3   Many countries aging together
We now study the general case where all countries age together, and rt adjusts to clear the
global asset market. Using an asset supply and demand framework, we find that demo-
graphic change increases global asset demand by exactly the average compositional effect
(10). We develop this observation into a sufficient statistic result for long-run outcomes,
which can be calculated by combining compositional effects with semielasticities of asset
demand and supply. These semielasticities, in turn, can be given closed-form expressions
in terms of observables and standard macro parameters.
    Our analysis starts from a first order approximation of the world asset market clear-
ing condition (5). To simplify, we assume here that net foreign asset positions are zero
at an initial date t = 0, and that governments target a constant Bt    c /Y c . We relax these
                                                                           t
assumptions in appendix B.4. We obtain:
                                       c                                         
                                      Y0        Wtc          Yc            Ktc
                                    Â Y0 D      Ytc
                                                         = Â 0D
                                                                           Ytc
                                                                                    ,                              (11)
                                    c                      c Y0



                                                         11
where D denotes level changes between time 0 and t. The left of (11) is the change in
global asset demand, while the right is the change in global asset supply.
    We focus on changes between time 0 and the "long run" LR, when the world has con-
                                                               log(W c /Y c )
verged to a demographic steady-state. Denote by ec,d               r          the semielasticity of
                                                           13           c , s      log((K c + Bc )/Y c )
country c's aggregate asset demand to the rate of return, and by e                        r              =
       c
  h K0
r0 +d W0c its semielasticity of asset supply, where h denotes the elasticity of substitution be-

tween capital and labor. For changes between t = 0 and t = LR, equation (11) then
becomes
                             ¯ comp + e
                             D        ¯ d · (r LR    r0 ) '       ¯ s · (r LR
                                                                  e             r0 ),                    (12)
                               LR

where bars denote averages across countries using initial wealth shares w c  W0
                                                                              c /W (see
                                                                                  0
the proof of proposition 2 in appendix B.3 for a derivation).
   Equation (12) shows that demographics affect equilibrium outcomes by shifting out
the asset demand curve by the average compositional effect. In this sense, the composi-
tional effect summarizes the full demographic "shock" to the world equilibrium. Aggre-
                                                                                ¯ d and e
gate outcomes are obtained by filtering this shock through the semielasticities e       ¯s.
Solving (12) for r LR      r0 , we obtain the following proposition.

Proposition 2. If agents start on a balanced growth path by age, initial net foreign asset positions
are zero, and governments maintain debt-to-GDP ratios constant, the long-run change in the rate
of return is, up to a first order approximation,

                                                               1    ¯ comp ,
                                     r LR   r0 '                    D                                    (13)
                                                          ¯d
                                                          e    +e¯ LR
                                                                  s

                      ¯
                     K0
        ¯ s = r0 + d W                                                           ¯ d is the average semielas-
                h
where e              ¯ 0 is the average semielasticity of asset supply to r, and e
ticity of individual asset holdings to r. The wealth-weighted average log change in the wealth-to-
GDP ratio is given by
                                                
                                                 W            ¯ s ¯ comp
                                                              e
                                      D LR log         ' s          D                                   (14)
                                                  Y        ¯ +e
                                                           e     ¯ d LR
Proof. See appendix B.3.

   Intuitively, the average compositional effect D ¯ comp creates an excess demand for assets
                                                     LR
at fixed r, which must be absorbed by an increase in the world capital stock and/or a
                                    ¯s + e
reduction in asset accumulation. If e    ¯ d is large, r falls little, because capital and assets
  13 Formally, ec,d
                  is the derivative with respect to r of the balanced growth level of log W /Y in a small open
economy with exogenous r, evaluated at the long-run steady-state age distribution. This includes both the
direct individual asset accumulation response to r, and the indirect response from the effect of r on wages.
We discuss ec,d further in the next section.


                                                     12
                                 ¯s
are very sensitive to r. If      e
                               ¯ s +e
                               e    ¯d
                                         is large, wealth rises a lot, because a large share of the
adjustment occurs through increases in the capital stock rather than through a reduction
in asset accumulation.
   Beyond interest rates and wealth levels, our framework also speaks to global imbal-
ances. To see why, note first that absent an adjustment in r, the net foreign asset position
(NFA) of a country would increase one-for-one with its compositional effect. In equilib-
rium, r must fall to ensure that NFAs are zero on average, so the adjustment in r has
to reduce the average NFA by the average compositional effect. Hence, the change in a
country's NFA is determined by the difference between its compositional effect and the
average compositional effect, subject to an additional adjustment when countries have
different semielasticities to r. The following proposition summarizes this result.

Proposition 3. Given the conditions of proposition 2, the long-run change in country c's net
foreign asset position NFAc satisfies
                                                                                              
          D LR NFAc /Y c               comp,c    comp          d,c        s,c      d      s
  log 1 +       c /Y c           '    D LR      D LR     + e         +e            ¯ +e
                                                                                   e  ¯          (r LR   r0 ) (15)
              W0    0

Proof. See appendix B.3.

   Since we have no direct way to predict the effect of demographics on long-run gov-
ernment debt targets, propositions 2 and 3 both assume a benchmark where each country
keeps long-run debt-to-GDP constant. Appendix B.4 discusses alternative settings where
debt-to-GDP changes in response to demographics. Two special cases stand out: when
each country increases its debt-to-GDP target by the amount of its compositional effect,
and when each country increases debt-to-GDP by the average world compositional effect.
In the first case, there is no change in interest rates or net foreign assets, and each coun-
try's wealth increases by exactly its compositional effect. In the second case, the same
conclusions hold for interest rates and wealth, but net foreign assets in each country in-
crease by the difference between its compositional effect and the global average, leaving
the global imbalances predicted by proposition 3 intact.14


2.4    The asset demand semielasticity ed
Propositions 2 and 3 show that the compositional effects determine aggregate outcomes
given the set of asset supply and demand semielasticities es and ed .15 The asset supply
  14 This second case can be viewed as the limit of a specification where we make long-term debt-to-GDP
highly responsive to interest rates, taking ( Bc /Y c )/r uniformly to · across all countries.
  15 In this section we drop the country superscripts c for convenience. Subscripts c denote consumption.



                                                    13
semielasticity es is only a function of observables and of the elasticity of substitution be-
tween labor and capital h .
   The asset demand semielasticity ed is more challenging to obtain. As noted by Saez
and Stantcheva (2018), there is a "paucity of empirical estimates" for how long-run asset
accumulation responds to changes in the rate of return.16 Remarkably, however, in a ver-
sion of our model without income risk and borrowing constraints, it is possible to express
ed only in terms of macroeconomic aggregates, the observed age profiles of assets and
consumption, and the elasticity of intertemporal substitution s. The latter is a standard
macro parameter that has been the topic of an extensive empirical literature.
   To build intuition, we first study the case where technology is Cobb-Douglas and r = g
in the initial steady-state. In that case, our result takes a simple form:

                                         C     Var Agec E Agec E Agea
                           ed = s                      +              .                                      (16)
                                    ( 1 + g )W 1 + r         1+r
                                    |        {z       } |     {z    }
                                           d                           d
                                                                      eincome
                                          esubstitution

Here, Agea and Agec are random variables that capture how asset holdings and consump-
tion are distributed across different ages. The random variables range over ages j, with
probabilities proportional to assets and consumption at each age.17 Thus, Var Agec is large
when consumption is spread out across different ages, and E Agec E Agea is large if con-
sumption, on average, occurs at higher ages than asset holdings do.
    In appendix B.5, we derive equation (16), connecting it to the broader logic of life-cycle
problems and the cross-sectional outcomes that they produce. The substitution effect
   d
sesubstitution scales with the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, and is proportional to
Var Agec since there is more scope for intertemporal substitution if consumption is more
                                                        d
spread out over the life cycle. The income effect eincome     reflects the fact that a higher r
increases total income. The size of the increase is proportional to total wealth W and
accrues at an average age of E Agea , and it is used to increase consumption by a uniform
proportion across all ages, implying that the rise in consumption occurs at an average age
of E Agec . Aggregate wealth increases if E Agea is lower than E Agec , because then, on
average, the extra interest income is saved before it is consumed.
  16 An elasticity of this kind is important in a variety of contexts, including capital taxation (Feldstein 1978,

Saez and Stantcheva 2018), the response of interest rates to automation (Moll, Rachel and Restrepo 2021),
and the welfare implications of increasing the public debt (Aguiar, Amador and Arellano 2021). See section
3.2 for a discussion of empirical estimates.
  17 Formally, we define the probability mass of Age at each age j to be p a / A, the share of assets in the
                                                       a                       j j
cross-section held by people of age j, and likewise for Agec . For the case g = 0, this is equivalent to defining
the mass as the share of assets held at age j across the life cycle, but with the cross-sectional definition our
result holds more generally.



                                                          14
     For the more general case, there are two complications. First, when technology is
not Cobb-Douglas, the labor share changes with r, introducing a new term. Second, our
previous result relied on current values being the same as present values normalized
                                                                1+r
by growth, which is no longer true when r 6= g. Writing r  ^  1  +g   1, we define the
                                                                         pj aj                      pj aj
present value versions of aggregates: W PV  Â j                         (1+r^) j
                                                                                   and C PV  Â j   (1+r^) j
                                                                                                            ,          PV
                                                                                                                and Agea
       PV as random variables having probability masses at j proportional to                                      pj aj
and Agec                                                                                                         (1+r^) j
                                                                                                                            and
 pj cj
(1+r^) j
           respectively. This leads us to the following proposition.

Proposition 4. Consider a small open economy with a steady-state population distribution p . If
individuals face no income risk or borrowing constraints, the long-run semielasticity of the steady-
state W /Y to the rate of return is given by

                               log W /Y
                       ed                   d
                                        = sesubstitution    d
                                                         + eincome + (h                    d
                                                                                        1)elaborshare .                     (17)
                                  r
             d
     ^ = 0, esubstitution
When r                         d
                          and eincome                         ^ 6= 0,
                                      are given by (16). When r

                                                   1        C                 PV
                                                                  E Agec E Agec
                                d
                               esubstitution   =                                                                            (18)
                                                 1 + r ( 1 + g )W        ^
                                                                         r
                                                         C /C PV
                                     d            1      W /W PV
                                                                        1
                                    eincome    =                                                                            (19)
                                                 1+g           ^
                                                               r

                d
In both cases, elaborshare is given by

                                     d              (1    s L )/s L                   wL
                                    elaborshare                     ,          sL        .                                  (20)
                                                         r+d                          Y

Proof. See appendix B.5.

    Proposition 4 provides, to our knowledge, the first expression for the semielasticity of
aggregate asset demand in a rich quantitative model as a function of measurable sufficient
statistics. Earlier work has instead relied on numerical simulations (e.g. Summers 1981,
Evans 1983, Cagetti 2001, Aguiar et al. 2021). While the literature has pointed out that
this elasticity can be affected by idiosyncratic income uncertainty, we show in section 4
that our formula still provides a close approximation in that context. Further, the results
of proposition 4 are continuous at r                              ^, (16) is a good approximation
                                         ^ = 0, so that for small r
                d
to the actual esubstitution      d
                            and eincome .18
  18 ed            tends to be small enough that for h close to 1, its contribution is insignificant.
      laborshare




                                                            15
3      Measurement and implications
This section uses the framework provided by propositions 1­4 to quantify the impact
of demographics on macroeconomic aggregates. First, we combine demographic projec-
                                                                                 comp
tions with representative household surveys to measure the compositional effect Dt
in 25 countries. Second, we use information on age profiles of consumption and wealth
together with assumptions on the structural elasticities h and s to calculate the semielas-
ticities of asset supply and demand to interest rates. Finally, we combine these results to
forecast interest rates, wealth levels, and global imbalances until the end of the twenty-
first century.


3.1      The compositional effect
Implementation. We take age distributions p jt from the historical data and future pro-
jections of the United Nations World Population Prospects. For these projections, we
consider three different scenarios, corresponding to the UN's baseline projection as well
as their "high fertility" and "low fertility" scenarios.
    For the age profiles of labor income and wealth, we use representative household
surveys. We use labor income data from the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS), which
provides harmonized labor surveys for a wide range of countries; we use wealth data
from a collection of wealth surveys such as the US Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF)
and the European Household Finance and Consumption Survey (HFCS). Our exercise
starts in 2016 and the surveys are from this year whenever possible; otherwise, we use
the closest available year. See appendix table A.1 for a complete list of data sources and
survey years.
    For labor income, the model object h j0 is the 2016 average pretax labor income of indi-
viduals of age j. We calculate it using a comprehensive measure of labor income earned
by all individuals of age j--including wages, salaries, bonuses, fringe benefits, and self-
employment income before social security and labor income taxes--expressed as a ratio
to the number of individuals of age j.
    For assets, the model object a j0 is the 2016 average individual net worth of individ-
uals of age j. We measure it as total assets net of liabilities, with housing19 and defined
    19 The
         fact that households accumulate assets in part through housing does not change proposition 1,
though it potentially changes the general equilibrium implications in propositions 2 and 3. In a simple
model, the demand for housing is proportional to overall consumption rather than labor, meaning that the
consumption-to-output ratio would appear in the ratio of asset supply to GDP, and a shift-share for this
ratio would appear together with the compositional effect in (12). This could mildly attenuate the effects
on real interest rates and NFAs.


                                                   16
contribution pension wealth included as assets, and mortgages included as liabilities. For
the United States, we also add age-specific estimates of the funded component of the em-
pirically important private defined benefit (DB) pension plans.20 We map the household
wealth measure from the surveys to an individual measure by splitting wealth equally
across the head of household, the spouse, and any other household members who are at
least as old as the head.21
   We use the demographic projections and the age profiles of asset and labor income
to project the compositional effect from 1950 to 2100 for the twenty-five countries in our
                                                        comp
sample. To aid interpretation, we sometimes express Dt       in terms of predicted changes
in the level of wealth-to-GDP (in percentage points), rewriting (10) as

                                     Wt     W0   W0  Dcomp            
                                               =    e t             1 ,                                  (21)
                                     Yt     Y0   Y0
with t = 0 corresponding to 2016. In this expression, W0 /Y0 is defined as the aggre-
gate net private wealth to gross domestic product ratio, obtained from either the World
Inequality Database (WID) or the OECD.22


Results. The results from this calculation are displayed in figure 2. Between 1950 to
2016, the compositional effect is positive in all countries, with an average increase of 80pp
of GDP, and an increase of 105pp in the United States. These effects are quantitatively
large. As a point of comparison, the actual changes in W /Y that occurred over this period
were 220pp for the average country with available data in the WID, and 118pp for the US.
   Looking ahead from 2016 to 2100, the effects remain positive, are even larger on aver-
age, and are heterogeneous across countries, ranging from 48pp in Hungary to 237pp in
China and 327pp in India, with a 147pp increase in the United States. In the high fertility
  20 For the present value of all DB wealth by age, we use estimates provided by Sabelhaus and Volz (2019),
and we set the funded share to 37.5% to ensure consistency with the aggregate amount of non-federal
funded defined benefit assets in the US economy. We exclude unfunded DB liabilities since they do not
affect the level of wealth a j0 that goes into asset demand; conceptually, we instead think of unfunded DBs
as a future transfer tr j in the household budget constraint (1). For the same reason, we do not include
"social security wealth" in a j0 (Sabelhaus and Volz 2020, Catherine, Miller and Sarin 2020).
   21 Appendix C.2 shows that the results are robust to using different splitting rules, or to constructing

income and wealth at the household level, and combining this with demographic projections for the age
distribution of the heads of households.
   22 Net private wealth is defined as the sum of housing, business, and financial assets, net of liabilities,

owned by households and nonprofit institutions serving households. Housing assets include the value of
dwellings and land; financial assets include currency, bonds, deposits, equity, and investment fund shares,
as well as life insurance and private pension funds. In appendix table A.1 we compare private wealth from
aggregate data to the aggregated sum of individual survey wealth. In theory, these should be equal, by
equation (2). In practice, when the two differ, equation (21) implicitly rescales wealth proportionately at
each age so that the survey aggregate matches the WID or OECD total.


                                                     17
           Australia                        Austria                       Belgium                      Canada                        China
                                200
          Low                                                    300                                                     400
 200      Baseline
          High                                                   200                        100
                                100
 100                                                                                                                     200
                                                                 100
                                                                                              0
   0                              0                                0
                                                                                                                           0
 100                                                             100                        100
   1950     2016         2100    1950        2016         2100     1950    2016      2100     1950     2016       2100    1950       2016         2100
           Germany                          Denmark                        Spain                       Estonia                      Finland
                                                                 400
                                100                                                         100                          100
 100
                                 50                              200                                                      50
                                                                                             50
                                  0                                                                                        0
   0
                                                                   0                          0
                                 50                                                                                       50

  1950      2016         2100    1950        2016         2100    1950     2016      2100    1950      2016       2100    1950       2016         2100
            France                       United Kingdom                   Greece                      Hungary                        India
                                300                              300                        100
 300
                                                                                                                         400
                                200                              200
 200                                                                                         50
 100                            100                              100                                                     200

                                                                   0                          0
   0                              0
                                                                                                                           0
 100                            100                              100
   1950     2016         2100     1950       2016         2100     1950    2016      2100    1950      2016       2100    1950       2016         2100
            Ireland                           Italy                        Japan                     Luxembourg                   Netherlands
                                400
 200                                                             200
                                                                                            200                          200
                                200                              100
 100                                                                                                                     100
                                                                                            100
                                                                   0
                                  0                                                                                        0
                                                                 100                          0
   0
                                                                                                                         100
  1950      2016         2100    1950        2016         2100    1950     2016      2100    1950      2016       2100     1950      2016         2100
            Poland                          Slovakia                      Slovenia                    Sweden                      United States
                                150
                                                                 100                        100                          200
 200
                                100
                                                                  50                         50                          100
 100                             50
                                                                   0                          0                            0
   0                              0
                                                                  50                         50
                                                                                                                         100
                                 50
  1950      2016         2100     1950       2016         2100    1950     2016      2100    1950      2016       2100     1950      2016         2100


                       Figure 2: Predicted change in W /Y from compositional effects
Notes: This figure depicts the evolution of the predicted change in the wealth-to-GDP ratio from the com-
positional effect, calculated using equation (21) for t =1950 to 2100, reported in percentage points. The base
year is 2016 (vertical line). The solid orange line corresponds to the medium fertility scenario from the UN,
the dashed green line to the low fertility scenario, and the dashed red line to the high fertility scenario.




                                                                          18
              350                                                                                                                                 327
                                                                                                                                      237
              300
                                                                                                                                            241
from Dcomp




              250                                                                                                               206
              200                                                                                               168
                                                                              135 138                 160 167         185 186
                                                              104                       146 147 154
W0




                                                                    107 119
Y0




              150
                           63        69   70             84
              100                                   79
Wt
Yt




                      48        66             72
               50

                0
                       UN

                         T
                        N

                        N

                         E

                         K
                         U

                         K

                        N

                         T
                        N

                                                                             L

                                                                            C
                                                                             L

                                                                            A
                                                                           LD

                                                                             R
                                                                            A

                                                                             S
                                                                             L

                                                                             X
                                                                            A

                                                                                                                                     N
                                                                                                                                     P
                                                                                                                                     D
                                                                         AU




                                                                                                                                   ES
                     SW




                                                                         PO



                                                                          IR




                                                                         BE
                      ES




                     AU




                                                                         GB




                                                                         LU

                                                                          IT
                                                                         GR
                     DN



                      SV




                                                                                                                                  IN
                     DE




                                                                         US




                                                                         FR
                      FI
                     SV




                     CA



                      JP




                                                                                                                                 CH
                                                                         N
                     H




                                                                              Country

                     Figure 3: Compositional effects and contribution from demographics alone
 Notes: The solid bars show the value of the predicted change in the wealth-to-GDP ratio from the com-
 positional effect between 2016 and 2100 across countries, calculated using equation (21), and reported in
 percentage points, corresponding to the end point of Figure 2. The transparent bars correspond to the case
 where Dcomp in equation (10) is calculated using age profiles a j0 and h j0 from the US, but country specific
 demographics p jt .


 scenario, the effect is reduced by a younger population: it is brought down to 75pp in
 China and to 142pp in the United States; in contrast, the low fertility scenario sees even
 sharper aging, and the effect swells to 245pp in the United States and 447pp in China.
    Figure 3 provides more detail on the heterogeneity across countries, with the solid bars
 displaying the predicted compositional change in W /Y to 2100 for the main population
 scenario. In principle, this cross-country heterogeneity could reflect either differences
 in demographic evolution or differences in the age profiles of assets and labor income.
 While both matter, the former is the main factor: countries with large effects are those
 whose demographic transitions are later and faster. The transparent bars in figure 3 illus-
 trate this by showing similar cross-country heterogeneity in compositional effects if we
 counterfactually assume that all countries have the same asset and income profile as the
 United States.23


 Unpacking the compositional effect: the case of the United States. The compositional
 effect reflects the interaction between population aging and the shapes of the wealth and
 income profiles. To help explain the magnitudes that we find, we study the case of the
 United States in greater detail.
     The main mechanisms are summarized in figure 4. The grey bars show the evolution
             23 By
         contrast, appendix figure A.4 shows that countries tend to experience similar compositional effects
 if they are all assumed to experience US demographics.


                                                                              19
 A. Changing population distributions over a fixed 2016 age-wealth profile
                                                      15                                                15                                     15
                                    a2016     p1950                             a2016          p2016                      a2016    p2100




                                                                                                                                                   Pop. shares (%)
Wealth (USD)




                     750K                                     750K                                           750K
                                                      10                                                10                                     10
                     500K                                     500K                                           500K
                                                      5                                                 5                                      5
                     250K                                     250K                                           250K

                        00      25      50   75                  00        25            50   75                00   25       50   75
                                       Age                                              Age                                  Age
 B. Changing population distributions over a fixed 2016 age-labor income profile
                     75K                              15      75K                                       15   75K                               15
                                 h2016                                         h2016                                  h2016
Labor income (USD)




                                              p1950                                            p2016                               p2100




                                                                                                                                                   Pop. shares (%)
                     50K                              10      50K                                       10   50K                               10


                     25K                              5       25K                                       5    25K                               5


                       00      25       50   75                 00        25            50    75               00    25       50   75
                                       Age                                             Age                                   Age

                           Figure 4: Age-wealth and age-labor income profiles with population age distributions
                       Notes: The solid lines in Panel A show the 2016 US age-wealth profiles from the SCF, expressed in current
                       USD. The solid lines in panel B show the 2016 age-income profile from the LIS (CPS), expressed in current
                       USD. Bars represent age distributions: 1950 age distribution in the left panel, 2016 age distribution in the
                       middle panel, and 2100 age distribution in the right panels.


                       of the population distribution, starting young in 1950 and growing progressively older
                       over time. In the figure, this population evolution is superimposed with the 2016 profiles
                       of assets and labor income, with panel A illustrating how demographic change pushes
                       up assets by moving individuals into high asset ages, and panel B illustrating how demo-
                       graphic change first pushes up aggregate labor income as the baby boomers reach middle
                       age--the so-called "demographic dividend" (Bloom et al., 2003)--and later pushes down
                       aggregate labor income as more individuals reach old age.
                           The total compositional effect can be separated into contributions from assets and la-
                       bor supply using a first-order approximation of equation (10):

                                                  comp        Â p jt p j0 a j0  Â p jt p j0 h j0 
                                              Dt          '                    +                  .                                     (22)
                                                                 Â p j0 a j0       Â p j0 h j0
                                                              |     {z       }   |    {z       }
                                                                      comp,a                        comp,h
                                                                     Dt                            Dt




                                                                                       20
     A. Wealth profile effect                    B. Income profile effect        C. Compositional effect
   200                                      80
            Low
                                            60                                 200
            Baseline
   100
            High                            40

     0                                      20                                   0

                                             0                                                            Data
   100
     1950       2000        2050     2100   1950       2000    2050    2100     1950     2000      2050        2100


   Figure 5: Effects of demographic composition on W and Y : United States 1950-2100
Notes: This figure depicts the evolution of the two terms in the decomposition (22). Panel A presents the
                                        0 comp, a
contribution from the wealth profile, WY0 Dt      . Panel B presents the contribution from the labor income
             comp,h
profile, W
         Y0 Dt
          0
                  . Panel C presents the overall compositional effect from equation (21), which is approxi-
mately equal to the sum of panel A and panel B, overlaid with historical data from the WID. In all graphs,
the solid orange line corresponds to the baseline fertility scenario and the dashed green and red lines con-
sider the low and high fertility scenario of the 2019 UN World Population Prospects. A bootstrapped 95%
confidence interval is computed by resampling observations 10,000 times with replacement.


                   comp,a          comp,h
The terms Dt         and Dt     capture the covariances between the changes in age distri-
                                                                                         comp,a
bution on the one hand, and asset holdings and labor incomes on the other hand. Dt
                                                                      comp,h
is positive if the share of people in high asset ages increases, and Dt      is positive if the
share of people in high labor income ages decreases. Since old people hold relatively more
assets and work relatively less, aging eventually makes both terms positive.
                                         comp,a      comp,h
   Figure 5 displays the evolution of Dt        and Dt      (multiplied by W0 /Y0 to obtain
                                                            comp ,a
level effects on wealth-to-GDP).24 Panel A shows that Dt            monotonically pushes up
the wealth-to-GDP ratio throughout the sample period. The trend flattens towards the
end of the 21st century as aging becomes concentrated in very old ages where asset ac-
cumulation ceases. However, the trend never reverses, due to the well-known fact that
asset decumulation in old age is very limited. A large literature has debated the extent
to which this limited decumulation reflects life-cycle forces, late-in-life-risks, or bequest
motives (see e.g. Abel 2001, Ameriks and Zeldes 2004, De Nardi, French and Jones 2010,
De Nardi, French, Jones and McGee 2021); our sufficient statistic result allows us to be
agnostic about the exact cause within our given class of possible explanations.25
                     comp,h
   Panel B shows Dt         falling between 1970 and 2010 and then increasing through-
                  comp
                          
  24 Since W0                   0 comp       0 comp, a   0 comp,h
           Y0   eDt     1 ' W  Y0 Dt    ' W Y0 Dt      +W
                                                        Y0 Dt     , the two effects approximately sum to the
total predicted change from equation (21).
  25 Our benchmark model captures late-in-life risks if b increases in old age. It rules out bequests, but
                                                            j
when we allow for them in section 4, we find that the compositional effect remains the primary determinant
of the effect on W /Y at constant interest rates.


                                                        21
out the rest of the 21st century, eventually adding 30pp to the wealth-to-GDP ratio. This
non-monotonic pattern is a mirror image of the literature on the so-called "demographic
dividend", which finds a non-monotonic output effect of aging as the population dis-
tribution moves across the hump-shaped profile of labor earnings (Bloom, Canning and
Sevilla 2003; Cutler et al. 1990). Our findings complement this literature by connecting
the output effect of demographics to an inverted effect on the wealth-to-GDP ratio. Quan-
titatively, this effect contributes a third of the full increase in Dcomp for the United States
between 2016 and 2100.
   Our results relate to earlier findings by Poterba (2001), who used a shift-share analysis
with population projections until 2050 and data from the 1983­1995 waves of the SCF to
conclude that Dcomp,a (which he called "projected asset demand") would be stable beyond
2020. He used this result to argue that an asset market meltdown was unlikely. In con-
                                                     comp,a
trast to Poterba, we find a substantial increase in Dt      throughout the remainder of the
twenty-first century, reflecting our use of later SCF waves, and, more importantly, popu-
lation projections with narrower age bins. In addition, Poterba's analysis abstracted from
the labor supply term Dcomp,h , which we find is not trivial.
    For other countries, the logic behind Dcomp is broadly similar to that for the United
States. In our online appendix,26 we reproduce Figures 4 and 5 for all twenty-five coun-
tries in our sample. While each country has its own peculiarity--for instance, the timing
of the demographic dividend is very uneven--in all of them, aging pushes individuals
into higher-asset, lower-income age groups after 2050.


Robustness to base year and construction of age profiles.          In using a single cross-section
of asset and labor income profiles, our calculations rely on our model's property that age
profiles are stable over time and grow at a constant rate g. Given this feature, any cross-
section will imply the same compositional effect, and cross-sectional estimates of a j0 and
h j0 will agree with estimates of age effects from a time-age-cohort decomposition of re-
peated cross-sections, provided growth loads on time rather than on cohort effects.
     In appendix C.2, we explore the effects of using different base years for the cross-
sectional profiles of labor income and asset holdings. For the United States, we use the
twelve waves of the LIS going back to 1976, as well as 21 waves of the SCF going back
                                comp
to the 1950s.27 Calculating Dt       for all the 252 combinations of profiles, we find that
the projections for 2016 to 2100 are very stable for all waves of the SCF going back to
  26 available
             at http://web.stanford.edu/~aauclert/demowealth21_country_appendix.pdf
  27 Forthe older waves, we use the SCF+ data developed in Kuhn, Schularick and Steins (2020), which
harmonizes and reweights the historical SCF data to maximize the comparability with the modern waves
of the SCF. We thank Amir Sufi for this suggestion.


                                                22
1989. If we use the profiles from even older waves, we find somewhat smaller effects: for
instance, the log compositional effect Dcomp is 20.8% with the oldest profiles, as opposed to
27.8% with the 2016 profiles.28 In contrast, using the age effects from our time-age-cohort
decomposition on the 1989­2016 data leads to an even larger Dcomp of 29.2%.29
    Hence, while there is some variation across specifications, the effect is always large,
positive, and of generally stable magnitude. In the appendix, we show that our results
are also robust to using different methods of allocating household wealth to individuals.


3.2    Asset supply and demand semielasticities
We now turn to calculating the semielasticities of asset supply and demand using the
formulas in proposition 2 and 4.


Asset supply semielasticity e ¯ s . The global asset supply semielasticity captures the re-
sponse of the capital-output ratio to the required rate of return.30 Proposition 2 provides
a closed-form solution for this semielasticity

                                                        h K ¯0
                                              ¯s =
                                              e             ¯ 0,                                           (23)
                                                     r0 + d W

                                                                                K0         ¯
showing that e ¯ s is proportional to the initial global capital-wealth ratio W ¯ 0 , the inverse of
the user cost of capital r0 + d, and the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor h .
                                                                   K¯0
From our world economy calibration in section 4, we obtain W        ¯ 0 = 0.78 and r0 + d = 9.7%.
Given these numbers, e    ¯ s is between 4 and 12 for h in a plausible range from 0.5 to 1.5; it
is 8 with a Cobb-Douglas aggregate production function (h = 1).


Asset demand semielasticity e   ¯ d . The global asset demand semielasticity reflects how
much aggregate asset accumulation responds in the long-run to changes in r. Proposition
4 expresses ec,d in each country c as a function of cross-sectional observables, the elastic-
ity of intertemporal substitution (EIS) s, and capital-labor substitution h . If s and h are
common across countries, these semielasticities aggregate as:

                         ¯d = s · e
                         e          d
                                  ¯ substitution +e d
                                                  ¯ income + (h           ¯ laborshare
                                                                     1) · e d
                                                                                       ,                   (24)
  28 Since W /Y = 4.28 in 2016, a log effect of 27.8% is the same as a level effect of 4.28(e0.278 1) = 137 p.p.
  29 The choice of profiles matters more for the 1950­2016 compositional effect: there, the oldest profiles

give an effect of 12.7%, the newest profiles give an effect of 24.6%, and the time-age-cohort decomposition
gives an effect of 35.8%.
  30 This reflects the absence of rents and the constant level of B /Y . If there are rents and debt-to-output
                                                                   t    t
responds to r, the responses of capitalized rents and debt to r also affects e¯s


                                                      23
where bars denote cross-country averages weighted by initial wealth levels.
    Implementing the formulas for ed,c in proposition 4 using the terminal age distribution
at 2100, we obtain e  d
                    ¯ substitution           d
                                           ¯ income
                                   = 39.5, e        = 2 and e   d
                                                              ¯ laborshare                d
                                                                                        ¯ substitution
                                                                           = 5.5. Since e              is
positive and much larger than the other terms, e      ¯ d is positive unless the EIS is extremely
low.31 When s has a reasonable value of 0.5 and the aggregate production function is
Cobb-Douglas, e ¯ d is around 18. This means that an exogenous decrease of the interest
rate by one percentage point reduces the world wealth-to-GDP ratio by 18%.
    The formulas in proposition 4 rely on the distribution of consumption and wealth
across different age groups j, as well as the "present value" equivalent distribution which
                                                                        1+r
discounts all values of the age group j by 1/(1 + r    ^) j , where r
                                                                    ^ = 1 +g  1 is the inter-
est rate net of the economy's growth rate. We construct these distributions by weight-
ing the wealth and consumption profiles by the long-run (2100) population distribution.
The wealth profiles by age are obtained as in section 3, and the consumption profiles are
backed out from the household budget constraint (1) given the age profiles of wealth and
income.32 The implied distributions are presented in appendix figure A.5.
   The distributions can be used together with equation (16) to explain the forces behind
our substitution and income effect terms.33 In (16), the substitution term is approximately
a wealth-weighted average of C /W times the variance of the age of consumption: since
C /W is around 1/6 and consumption is approximately uniformly distributed between
ages 20 and 80, a back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that e   d
                                                                   ¯ substitution is approxi-
                2
mately (80 20) /(12 · 6) = 50, close to the actual value of 39.5. The income effect is the
difference between the average age of consumption and the average age of assets: since
consumption on average occurs a few years before asset holdings, we obtain a negative,
but relatively small, income effect.
   Finally, our labor share term e   d
                                   ¯ laborshare is the cross-country average of (1 s L )/s L ·
1/(r0 + d) weighted by wealth. The labor shares from our world economy calibration in
section 4 are on average approximately 2/3. Given r0 + d = 9.7%, e         d
                                                                         ¯ laborshare is roughly
(1 s L )/s L · 1/(r0 + d)  (1/2)  10 = 5.

Comparison to existing empirical estimates. A number of papers have used variations
in capital income taxes to estimate how asset accumulation responds to rates of return
  31 For example, with a Cobb-Douglas production function, e   ¯ d is positive when s        2/39.5  0.05, a
relatively weak condition. In comparison, Achdou, Han, Lasry, Lions and Moll (2021) obtain s              1 as a
                         ¯ d 0 in a standard Aiyagari model.
sufficient condition for e
  32 We use this indirect procedure, rather than consumption surveys directly, since the latter tend to be less

comprehensive than wealth surveys and are not available for all countries in our study.
  33 Our exact implementation uses equations (18) and (19) and a country-specific r^, but in practice r
                                                                                                      ^ is small
enough in every country that expression (16) gives a useful approximation.


                                                      24
(e.g. Kleven and Schultz 2014, Zoutman 2018, Jakobsen, Jakobsen, Kleven and Zucman
2020, Brülhart, Gruber, Krapf and Schmidheiny 2021). Reviewing this literature, Moll et
al. (2021) identify a range for ed of 1.25 to 35.34 This range coincides closely with that
implied by equation (24) for plausible values of s and h . None of the existing empirical
estimates are negative, in line with our findings on substitution effects dominating in-
come effects. In contrast to the infinite elasticity predicted by representative-agent mod-
els, or overlapping generations models with dynastic altruism motives (Barro 1974), all
estimates are sufficiently small to imply that interest rates need to fall substantially to ac-
commodate the large compositional effects in the data, as we quantify more precisely in
the next section.


3.3    General equilibrium implications
We now put together our calculated compositional effects and semielasticities, using
proposition 2 and 3 to obtain long-run general equilibrium changes. Here, we define
the long run as 2100.


The rate of return and wealth-to-GDP ratios. Proposition 2 shows that long-run changes
in the rate of return and average wealth levels are functions of D ¯ comp , e
                                                                            ¯s         ¯d
                                                                     LR       LR , and e LR .
                   ¯ comp        c   c , comp
    We estimate D    LR    Âc w D2100 = 32% by taking each country's compositional
effects until 2100 from section 3.1, averaged using 2016 wealth levels. Equations (23)
and (24) in section 3.2 express e  ¯s
                                    LR and e  ¯d
                                               LR in terms of capital-labor substitutability h
and the elasticity of intertemporal substitution s. Our central estimate uses canonical
values of h = 1 and s = 0.5. Given the uncertainty surrounding the value of these
parameters, however, we also consider a collection of lower and higher values. For the
EIS, we consider a low value of s = 0.25 and a high value of s = 1, spanning the range
typically considered in the macroeconomics literature (e.g. Havránek 2015). For capital-
labor substitution, we consider a low value h = 0.6 taken from Oberfield and Raval (2021),
and a high value h = 1.25 taken from Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014).
    Table 1 presents our results. The left-hand panel shows the changes in the rate of re-
turn, calculated using equation (13), while the right-hand panel shows the average change
in log wealth-to-GDP in percent, calculated using equation (14).
    We find that the equilibrium return r unambiguously falls in response to demographic
change, refuting the "great demographic reversal" hypothesis (Goodhart and Pradhan,
  34 Mollet al. (2021) discuss the literature's implications for a slightly different semielasticity,  log W /r.
Since underlying micro experiments (mostly wealth taxes) are unlikely to change Y differentially across
treatment and control, however, this should be equivalent to our ed =  log(W /Y )/r.


                                                      25
                   Table 1: Change in world interest rate and wealth-to-GDP
                                                                                
                                  A. r LR     r0                B. D LR log W
                                                                            Y
                                             s                          s
                            h      0.25     0.50     1.00       0.25 0.50 1.00
                           0.60 -3.03 -1.56 -0.79               14.6    7.5     3.8
                           1.00 -2.00 -1.23 -0.70               16.0     9.9    5.6
                           1.25 -1.65 -1.09 -0.65               16.5    10.9    6.5

Notes: This table presents predictions for the change in the total return on wealth (r) and the wealth-
weighted log wealth-to-GDP (W /Y ) between 2016 (t = 0) and 2100 (t = LR) using our sufficient statistic
methodology. Columns vary the assumption on the elasticity of intertemporal substitution s, rows vary the
assumption on the elasticity of capital-labor substitution h . The central estimates are in bold. r is expressed
in percentage points, and log wealth in percent (100 · log).


2020). This result follows because D      ¯ comp and e
                                                     ¯s + e
                                                          ¯ d are both positive for any plausible
                                            LR
combination of s and h . Intuitively, the compositional effect increases net asset demand,
       ¯s + e
and if e     ¯ d > 0, then a fall in r is required to equalize the world's supply and demand
of assets.35 In our central scenario, r falls 123 basis points by the end of the twenty-first
century; the fall is larger when s or h are small, since this limits the responsiveness of
asset supply and demand to falling returns.36
    For our central scenario, average wealth-to-GDP increases by 10%, or approximately
47 percentage points in levels as a share of GDP. While substantial, this increase is smaller
than the average compositional effect of 32%, since the equilibrium response from the
compositional effect is dampened by a factor of e    ¯ d /(e
                                                           ¯s + e
                                                                ¯ d ) ' 1/3, which is the share
of adjustment occurring through increases in investment rather than through reductions
in asset accumulation. Intuitively, whenever e  ¯ d > 0, the general equilibrium response is
smaller than the compositional effect, since households accumulate fewer assets as inter-
est rates fall. Wealth responses are larger when investment is elastic relative to accumu-
lation; that is, when h is large relative to s.
    Our finding of sizable but not radical increases in future wealth-to-GDP ratios lies
between the predictions by Piketty (2014) and Krusell and Smith (2015): Piketty and Zuc-
man argue that a steadily lower population growth rate will lead to a surge in W /Y in the
  35 Insection 5, we explain why thinking of equilibrium in terms of flows rather than stocks can lead one
to miss this conclusion. Our framework can also be extended to rationalize the effect of demographics in
models in which agents hold different kinds of assets that command different returns (see e.g. Kopecky and
Taylor 2020). If, for instance, the compositional effect of aging pushes up the net demand for safe assets,
then the equilibrium safe return will tend to fall relative to the equilibrium risky return.
  36 Using numerical simulations, Papetti (2019) presents similar comparative statics. Appendix F.2 shows

that the functional form implied by our sufficient statistic formulas fit his results very well.



                                                      26
             Y c : 2016-2100   150


                               100


                                50
c
Predicted D NFA




                                 0


                                50


                               100
                                    T

                                     E
                                    N
                                            UN

                                               U
                                              N

                                               T

                                               K

                                              N

                                               K

                                               C
                                              N

                                               L

                                               R

                                               A

                                               A

                                               S
                                               L
                                               A
                                             LD

                                               X
                                               L

                                               P

                                              N
                                               D
                                          AU




                                            ES
                                 SW




                                           PO




                                           BE




                                            IR
                                  ES




                                          AU




                                          GB




                                          LU
                                            IT
                                          GR
                                          DN



                                           SV




                                           IN
                                          DE




                                           FR

                                          US
                                 SV




                                            FI




                                          CA




                                            JP




                                          CH
                                          N
                                          H




                                     Figure 6: Long-run NFAs under alternative assumptions for s and h
 Notes: This figure presents predictions for NFAs using our sufficient statistic methodology. The solid bars
 report D LR NFAc /Y c when applying equation (15), calculating es and ed assuming s = 0.5 and h = 1.
 The confidence intervals correspond to the maximum and the minimum value obtained from this formula
 across all possible combinations of s and h considered in Table 1. The dots correspond to the demeaned
                         comp,c   comp
 compositional effect, D LR     D LR , the first term of equation (15), which is independent of s and h .


 twenty-first century,37 while Krusell and Smith argue that the predictions from represen-
 tative agent models of no change in W /Y are more consistent with empirical responses
 of savings rates to changes in the growth rate.

 Global imbalances. Next, we turn to the evolution of net foreign asset positions. Figure
 6 shows the changes between 2016 and 2100 predicted by the formula in proposition 3.
 The bars display the main results, which feature a large divergence in NFA positions,
 with India and China experiencing increases of 44 to 125 percentage points and Germany
 experiencing a decrease of 55 percentage points.
     The large divergence of NFAs mainly reflects the large heterogeneity in compositional
 effects found in section 3.1. By proposition 3, this heterogeneity affects global imbalances
                                                    comp,c  ¯ comp , whose direct implications
 through the demeaned compositional effects D LR            D LR
                                              s      d
 for NFAs (assuming no heterogeneity in e and e ) are plotted as circles in figure 6. While
 there are some variations, the demeaned compositional effects broadly mirror the pre-
 dicted changes in NFAs.
     Compared to the results on r and wealth, the results on global imbalances are less
 sensitive to the value of the elasticities h and s. As proposition 3 shows, semielasticities
 only affect global imbalances insofar as they differ across countries. Since changing h
                     37 According
                   to Piketty and Zucman, W /Y = s/ g fits the historical data quite well with a stable savings
 rate s. If g falls from 1.5% to 1%, consistent with a 0.5% forecasted decline in population growth to 2100,
 then their model predicts a log increase in W /Y of log(1.5) = 40%

                                                                    27
 A. NFA projection                                                 B. Historical performance
                           CHN    DEU   IND   JPN    USA
                  100                                                                         100




                                                                     Y c : 1970-2015 (Data)
                                                                                                                                     JPN
                                                                                                                      DEU
 Percent of GDP



                   50                                                                            0
                                                                                                             IND
                                                                                                                USA
                    0
                                                                                              100




                                                                  c
                                                                                                                                45o line




                                                                  D NFA
                   50
                                                                                              200            IRL                Reg. line

                  100                                                                                100          0               100
                         2000    2025 2050    2075    2100                                                               c
                                     Year                                                               Predicted D NFA
                                                                                                                     Y c   : 1970-2015


                        Figure 7: Using the demeaned compositional effect to project NFAs
Notes: Panel A presents the empirical NFA-to-GDP ratio as presented in figure 1 until 2016, and from
2016 on the country-specific demeaned compositional effect until 2100. Panel B compares the shift-share
between 1970 and 2015 (x-axis) to the change in NFA from the IMF Balance of Payments and International
Investment Positions Statistics (y-axis). The dotted line is a 45o line.


and s primarily moves semielasticities in parallel across countries, they have a relatively
limited effect on the differences across countries. In the figure, the confidence bands show
the minimum and the maximum prediction as h and s parameters are varied in the range
considered above. With a few exceptions, these bands are quite tight.
   The importance of demeaned compositional effects suggests a dynamic projection for
NFAs that simply uses the demeaned compositional effect at each point in time:38
                                                     c                                                       
                                          NFAc t   W0       comp,c
                                                          (Dt                                 ¯ comp )
                                                                                              D
                                        D        '      e                                       t        1                               (25)
                                           Ytc      c
                                                   Y0

Panel A of figure 7 implements this calculation. The solid lines show global imbalances
until today for the five large economies discussed in the introduction, and the dashed
lines show the projections from equation (25). In the next few decades, we expect to see a
widening of existing global imbalances: China's net foreign assets will rise substantially,
while those of the US will decline. Although these trends flatten mid-century, the second
half of the 21st century features a conspicuous rise in India's net foreign assets, offset
partly by a decline in Germany and Japan, whose demographic transitions at that point
are nearly complete. These results trace back to the heterogeneity in compositional effects
                                                                                     comp,c
that we documented in section 3.1, which showed China and India with very large Dt
     38 Appendix
             figure A.6 instead applies equation (15) at each point, taking into account the interest rate
adjustment and the heterogeneity in elasticities across countries.


                                                             28
relative to the world average.
    To conclude this section, we explore how well equation (25) captures historical vari-
ations in NFAs. The results are shown in panel B in figure 7, with the horizontal axis
showing the change in NFAs between 1970 and 2015 predicted by (25), and the vertical
axis showing the actual changes. For such a simple exercise, the two line up quite well: for
instance, Japan had the highest projected rise in its NFA, of around 100pp of GDP, which
is actually what occurred over this period. The regression line of actual on predicted NFA
changes is close to the 45 degree line. Of course, non-demographic forces are also at play
in explaining NFA developments over this period of time--including valuation effects
from fluctuations in nominal exchange rates and relative stock market performance, as
well as inflows into Ireland due to its growing status as a tax haven.39 But this exercise
suggests that demographic change, as captured by compositional effects, is in fact an im-
portant driver of global imbalances looking backward. This echoes earlier findings from
the structural demographics literature (e.g. Backus et al. 2014 and Bárány et al. 2019).


4      The compositional effect in a quantitative model
In our sufficient statistic analysis so far, we predicted equilibrium outcomes from a small
set of parameters and data moments. The underlying model in section 2 was rich in some
respects, but it also abstracted from a number of forces that the quantitative demograph-
ics literature has found to be important to explain savings: bequest motives, changing
mortality, and changes in government taxes, transfers, and retirement policy.
    In this section, we extend the baseline model to incorporate these features. We simu-
late this model numerically, and study how well the sufficient statistic analysis holds up.
We find that it remains an excellent guide, both qualitatively and quantitatively. The main
exception is when the fiscal adjustment in response to an aging population is one-sided:
if the budget is balanced entirely with higher taxes, the aggregate effects of aging become
uniformly smaller, while if it is balanced entirely with lower benefits, the effects become
uniformly larger.


4.1         Extending the model of section 2
The basic setup is the same as in section 2. Below we outline the main new features, and
provide details in appendix D.1. We continue to omit the country superscript c unless
    39 On
        the importance of valuation effects for NFAs, see Gourinchas and Rey (2007) and Atkeson, Heath-
cote and Perri (2021). On the importance of tax havens, see Zucman (2013) and Coppola, Maggiori, Neiman
and Schreger (2021)

                                                  29
there is a risk of ambiguity.
    For the production sector, we now assume that F is a CES production function with
elasticity h . We make two modifications to the specification of demographics: survival
rates fjt can vary over time, and there is an exogenous sequence of migration by age M jt .
    To allow for a longer working life, we introduce a time-varying retirement policy r jt .
We also introduce bequests governed by non-homothetic preferences, which help explain
asset inequality and the limited decumulation of assets at old ages. We remove annu-
ity markets given their limited share in aggregate wealth; individuals self-insure against
mortality risks, with assets remaining at death given as bequests. Last, we assume that
there is intergenerational transmission of ability. These are all standard features of quan-
titative OLG models (e.g. De Nardi 2004).
    The new individual problem is
                                                   2          1
                                                                                                          3
                                                        1                                           1 n
                                        J
                                                   6   c jt   s
                                                                          n   1                a jt 7
                           max E k   Â b j F jt 4 1             1
                                                                    + U Zt    s
                                                                                  1    fjt
                                                                                               1 n
                                                                                                    5                        (26)
                                     j =0                       s

  s.t.   c jt + a j+1,t+1  wt (1            tt )` jt (z j )(1       r jt ) + tr jt (z j ) + (1 + rt )[a j,t + br
                                                                                                               jt ( z j )]   (27)
               a j+1,t+1       ¯ Zt .
                               a

   Compared to the setup in section 2, the second term in the utility function captures
                                                                    1
preferences for bequests. Bequest preferences have curvature n  s     to allow for non-
                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                              n
homotheticity, and are scaled with the mortality risk 1             fjt and a term Zt s that makes
this non-homotheticity consistent with balanced growth. In the budget constraint, br                  jt ( z j )
denotes bequests received. The factor r jt 2 [0, 1] denotes retirement policy, and specifies
how much labor individuals of age j are allowed to supply at time t.
    The individual state z j consists of a permanent component q , which is Markov across
generations, and a transient component # j , which is Markov across years, both normal-
ized to have mean 1. Total labor supply is the product of these two components and a
deterministic age profile: ` jt (z j ) = q# j ` j . Bequests received br
                                                                       jt ( z j ) are obtained from pool-
ing all bequests from parents of each type q , distributing them across ages j in proportion
to a fixed factor Fj , and across types q 0 in proportion to the intergenerational transition
matrix of types P(q 0 |q ).
    For government policy, we assume that transfers reflect the social security system and
are given by tr jt (z j ) = r jt q dt , where dt denotes the time-varying replacement rate. The
government policy consists of a sequence of retirement policies {r jt } and a fiscal rule
                                                                                       Bt
that targets an eventually converging sequence of government debt { Y                   t
                                                                                          }, where the debt


                                                                  30
sequence is obtained by dynamically adjusting replacement rates dt , taxes tt and con-
sumption Gt .


4.2   Asset demand and supply in the extended model
Unlike in the baseline model of section 2, demographic change in our extended model
affects individual asset accumulation and labor supply decisions even for a fixed r by
generating variation over time in received bequests b    ~ r (q ), survival rates fjt , tax and ben-
                                                           jt
efit policy {tt , dt }, and retirement policy r jt . These changes create non-compositional
effects on the wealth-to-GDP ratio, and imply that propositions 2 and 3 no longer hold,
since these propositions relied on the compositional effect summarizing all effects of de-
mographics.
    However, the asset demand and supply framework underpinning these propositions
still applies to the extended model, provided that we replace the compositional effect
  comp,c                                                                  ,c
Dt       with the more general notion of a small-open-economy effect Dsoe
                                                                       t     . This effect is
defined as the change in the wealth-to-GDP ratio for a small open economy facing a fixed
r over time, with Dsoe Dcomp 6= 0 indicating that non-compositional effects are present.
We can then prove the following.

Proposition 5. If the wealth holdings of agents start in a steady-state distribution given r0 and
p0c , then proposition 2 and 3 hold in the extended model, with Dcomp,c replaced by Dsoe,c , where
      ,c
Dsoe
  t      is defined as the change in the wealth-to-GDP ratio between 0 and t in a small open economy
equilibrium with a constant rate of return r0 .

Proof. See appendix D.2.

    Proposition 5 provides a general framework for interpreting the effects of demograph-
ics. In appendix F.1, we use this framework to analyze the findings in Eggertsson et al.
(2019) (EMR) and Gagnon et al. (2021) (GJLS), two recent papers that find very different
effects of demographics on the real interest rate from 1970 to 2015. EMR's much larger
effect is explained primarily by a compositional effect that is much larger than in the
data, driven both by a steep age-wealth profile and by an overstated change in the age
composition of the population.40
    The next two sections calibrate our model and interpret the results through the lens of
proposition 5.
  40 EMR's   lower semielasticities, especially a low es , also play some role.




                                                        31
4.3    Calibration
We calibrate a world economy consisting of the 25 economies from section 3. To obtain
parameters for each country, we calibrate a steady-state version of our model to 2016
data. Starting from this steady state, we then simulate the model from 2016 onward given
demographic projections.


Steady-state calibration procedure    Appendix D.3 spells out the steady-state version of
our model, which for the most part is standard.41 The main calibration parameters and
results are displayed in table 2. For parameters that are common across countries, the
"All" column displays the world value. Country-specific parameters have a c-superscript,
and the US values are displayed for illustration. Below we summarize the main elements
of the calibration, with some supplemental information in appendix D.4.
    The real rate of return r is the 2016 value from figure 1 in the introduction, with the
calculation described in appendix A. For the wealth-to-GDP ratio W c /Y c , we use the
same data as in section 3. We use data from the IMF to obtain country-specific debt levels
Bc /Y c and net foreign asset positions NFAc /Y c , adjusted to ensure that Âc NFAc = 0.
The capital-output ratio is obtained residually as K c /Y c = W c /Y c Bc /Y c NFAc /Y c .42
    On the production side, we set the elasticity of substitution between labor and capital
to unity, h = 1. Countries have a common labor-augmenting growth rate g calibrated to
                                               Yc
the average growth in output per labor unit Ltc between 2000 and 2016. The common de-
                                                t
preciation rate is calibrated to match aggregate capital consumption from the Penn World
Table given the capital stocks calibrated above. Given these parameters, we obtain the
                                                                               Kc
investment to output ratio and the labor share in each country from Y           c and the country-

specific growth rate gc  (1 + nc )(1 + g) 1.
    For government policy, we assume that all countries have a discrete retirement policy,
with rc                r,c and rc = 1 for j    J r,c , where J r,c is the retirement age. The re-
       j = 0 for j < J          j
tirement age is calibrated to the effective age of labor market exit, which we define using
information from the OECD and the labor income profiles.43 We define the income tax
  41 The main non-standard element is a counterfactual flow of migrants, which we introduce to ensure that

the steady-state implied by the 2016 birth and death rates can exactly match the observed age distribution
in 2016. This method is similar to the one used in Penn Wharton Budget Model (2019), and is one way to
address a generic problem in the calibration of steady-state demographic models, which is that observed
mortality and population shares are generally inconsistent with a stationary population distribution. This
adjustment is only needed in the steady-state: to simulate the dynamics after 2016, we use the migration
flows given in demographic projections.
   42 Note that the implied K /Y for the US is high relative to standard measures of capital stock. Our

methodology implicitly assumes that unmeasured capital accounts for this gap. An alternative procedure
would be to explain the gap using markups.
   43 Our main source is the OECD's data on "effective age of labor market exit" from the OECD Pensions at



                                                   32
                              Table 2: Calibration parameters

Parameter     Description                    US       All       Source
Demographics
  Jw, J    Initial and terminal ages                 20, 95
   n c     Population growth rate           0.6%                UN World Population Prospects
   pcj     Population distribution                              UN
   fjc     Survival probabilities                               UN

Returns and assets
      r      Real return on wealth                   3.9%       Described in appendix A
 W c /Y c    Total wealth over GDP          438%                WID
   c
  B /Y   c   Debt over GDP                 106.8%               IMF
NFA /Y c   c Net foreign assets              35.8%              IMF
                                                                Wc    Bc         NFAc
  K c /Y c   Capital over GDP               367%                Yc    Yc          Yc

Production side
                                                                Kc
  I c /Y c   Investment over GDP            30.9%               Yc (d +    gc )
                                                                            c1
                                                                            K
    ac
                                                                                  h
              Constant in prod. fn.         0.356               (r + d )    Yc
                                                                      K           c
   s L,c      Labor share                    0.64          1 (r + d ) Y c
     d        Depreciation rate                      5.79% Âc d K (PWT) divided by Âc K c
                                                               c c
                                                                                        Yt
    g         Technology growth                      2.03% World average 2000-16 from Â N  h jt j0
    h         K / L elasticity of subst.               1        Standard

Government policy
   J r ,c   Retirement age                    66                OECD
   c
 G /Y     c Consumption over GDP            12.5%               Government budget
      c
    d       Social security benefits        71.3%               Benefits-to-GDP from OECD
    tc      Labor tax rate                  31.6%               Balanced total budget

Income process
    ce       Idiosyncratic persistence                0.91      Auclert and Rognlie (2018)
    ue       Idiosyncratic std. dev.                  0.92      Auclert and Rognlie (2018)
    cq       Intergenerational persist.              0.677      De Nardi (2004)
    uq       Intergenerational std. dev.              0.61      De Nardi (2004)
    a        Borrowing limit                     0

Preferences
     s        EIS                                     0.5       Standard
    b¯c       Discount factor process       1.044               See text
     xc       Discount factor process      0.00063              See text
    Uc        Bequests scaling factor       67.95               See text
     n        Bequest curvature                       1.32      See text

                                            33
rate t using OECD data on the average tax wedge on personal earnings. Transfers capture
the social security system, and satisfy tr c (z j ) = r j q dc , where we calibrate the social secu-
rity system replacement rate dc by targeting country-specific benefit-to-GDP ratios net of
taxes from the OECD Social Expenditure Database. Government consumption G c /Y c is
adjusted to ensure a constant debt-to-output ratio.
   For the income process, we use average labor income by age to target the deterministic
component of labor supply ` ¯ j for all ages before retirement, j < J r,c .44 For the idiosyn-
cratic term z, the log transient component follows an AR(1) process over the life-cycle, and
the log permanent component follows an AR(1) process across generations. The param-
eters of these processes are taken from Auclert and Rognlie (2018) and De Nardi (2004).
We assume that the distribution of bequests received across ages Fj is common across
countries, and we match it to the age distribution of bequests received in the Survey of
Consumer Finances.
   The remaining parameters are the elasticity of intertemporal substitution s, the time
preference profile b j , and the weight and curvature on bequests (U, n). We assume that
parameters s, U and n are common across countries. To match country-specific age-
wealth profiles, we allow the level shifters b j to vary across countries according to a
quadratic formula, log bc               ¯ c + x c ( j 40)2 , where x c = 0 corresponds to expo-
                                 j  log b
                           j =
nential discounting. Our calibration first sets s to 0.5 in line with section 3. To discipline
the common U and n, we set them jointly with the parameters of US time discount values
bUS
  j to minimize the squared distance to the US profile of wealth by age and the bequest-
to-GDP ratio, subject to the constraint of precisely matching the US aggregate wealth to
GDP ratio.45 For all other countries, we set bc and x c to fit the profile of wealth by age,
again subject to the constraint of exactly matching the wealth-to-GDP ratio.
     Table 3 summarizes calibration outcomes for the 12 largest economies. The successful
fit of the long-run compositional effect Dcomp,c reflects the good fit of the labor and wealth
profiles. In the appendix, we provide additional information about the calibration, in-
cluding the fit of labor and wealth profiles and the main parameters for all 25 economies.
a Glance guide. In seven countries, the age provided by the OECD implies that labor market exit happens
after the age at which aggregate labor income falls below implied benefit income. In those cases, we define
the latter age as the date of labor market exit. See the appendix for details.
  44 For j             ¯ j is calibrated from age- j labor earnings, scaled up by LFPR J r,c to compensate for labor
              J r ,c , `                                                          LFPR j
force participation at j being depressed by retirement. Since (1 r j )`¯ j = 0 for all j  J r,c , this value does
not matter for steady-state, but will matter in simulations where the retirement is increased.
  45 The US bequest-to-GDP ratio is from Alvaredo, Garbinti and Piketty (2017), and in the appendix, we

also validate the model to the inequality of bequests taken from Hurd and Smith (2002).




                                                        34
                               Table 3: World economy calibration

                         Dcomp,c          Components of wealth          Government policy
                                           Wc     Bc        NFAc                Benc
          Country      Model Data          Yc     Yc         Yc          tc      Yc
          AUS            30        29     5.09   0.40       -0.46       0.29         0.04
          CAN            21        20     4.63   0.92       0.20        0.31         0.04
          CHN            47        45     4.20   0.44       0.25        0.30         0.04
          DEU            21        20     3.64   0.69       0.58        0.50         0.10
          ESP            42        37     5.33   0.99       -0.74       0.39         0.10
          FRA            31        30     4.85   0.98       -0.05       0.48         0.13
          GBR            27        26     5.35   0.88       0.08        0.31         0.06
          IND            65        56     4.16   0.68       -0.08       0.30         0.01
          ITA            34        30     5.83   1.31       -0.02       0.48         0.13
          JPN            24        22     4.85   2.36       0.66        0.32         0.09
          NLD            34        33     3.92   0.62       0.70        0.37         0.05
          USA            32        29     4.38   1.07       -0.36       0.32         0.06

Notes: This table presents key initial steady state (2016) statistics for the 12 largest economies by GDP.
The first two columns show the value of the compositional effect Dcomp,c in both the model and the data,
expressed in percent (100 · log). The next three columns report the wealth-to-GDP ratio W /Y , government
debt-to-GDP ratio B/Y , and NFA-to-GDP ratio NFA/Y . The final two columns report the average tax
wedge on labor income t and retirement-benefit-to-GDP ratio Ben/Y . Data sources are given in the main
text.


4.4    Simulations and results
The steady-state calibration pins down the individual parameters, the production param-
eters, and the initial state of all economies. To study the effect of demographic change,
we feed the economy with paths for all demographic variables from the UN World Pop-
ulation Prospects for 2016 to 2100. We are interested in how wealth levels, rates of return,
and net foreign asset positions evolve, and how this evolution relates to our findings from
section 3.
    Formally, we assume that the world economy has reached a stationary equilibrium
at 2300 and we solve for the transition dynamics between 2016 and 2300. Our experi-
ments hold preferences and the aggregate production function constant, but government
policy instruments change over time as aging creates fiscal shortfalls that need to be com-
pensated. In our main specification, we assume that the retirement age in all countries
increases by one month per year over the first 60 years of the simulation (in line with
CBO's projection for the US), and that the government operates a fiscal rule that keeps
the debt-to-output ratio constant by relying equally on tax increases, benefit cuts, and
government consumption reductions.



                                                   35
                    Table 4: Baseline and extended model results: 2016­2100
                                                                      ¯   ¯ comp   ¯ soe
                                                    Dr      D log W¯
                                                                   Y
                                                                          D        D     ¯d
                                                                                         e   e¯s
         Sufficient statistic analysis             -1.23       9.9         31.8         17.8 8.0
         Preferred model specification             -1.23      10.3         34.1    30.3 17.1 8.0
         Alternative model specifications
          + Constant bequests                      -1.18       10.0       34.1     27.0    14.9   8.0
          + Constant mortality                     -1.23       10.9       34.1     27.1    13.8   8.0
          + Constant taxes and transfers           -1.33       11.9       34.1     30.1    14.5   8.0
          + Constant retirement age                -1.49       13.4       34.1     34.1    14.6   8.0
          + No income risk                         -1.47       13.2       33.9     33.9    13.8   8.0
          + Annuities                              -1.33       11.5       34.2     34.2    17.2   8.0
         Alternative fiscal rules
          Only lower expenditures                  -1.29       11.0       34.1     32.6 17.9 8.0
          Only higher taxes                        -0.88        6.7       34.1     19.4 14.6 8.0
          Only lower benefits                      -1.50       12.9       34.1     39.1 18.4 8.0

Notes: Dr, D log W  ¯ comp , and D
                                 ¯ soe denote the changes in the model simulation between 2016 and 2100,
                 Y, D
with Dr reported in percentage points and the others reported in log percent.


Changes in r and W /Y . Table 4 reports the simulation results for Dr and D log W /Y ,
together with the corresponding average compositional effect D    ¯ comp , the average small
open economy effect D   ¯ soe , and the average asset demand and supply semielasticities e¯d
and e¯ s .46 We present results from our preferred model specification on the second line,
and reproduce results from the sufficient statistic analysis on the first line as a point of
comparison.
      Overall, the model results are close to the sufficient statistic analysis, with an identical
Dr = 1.23pp in both the model and sufficient statistic analysis, and D log W /Y = 10.3%
in the model compared to 9.9% in the sufficient statistic analysis. The formulas Dr =
    D¯ soe                              ¯ s ¯ soe
   e d
   ¯ +e  ¯ s and  D log  W  / Y =   ¯ +e
                                    e d
                                        e
                                           ¯s
                                              D from proposition 5 provide an excellent approxima-
tion to the full model results, predicting Dr  1.21pp and D log W /Y  9.7%. Given
the success of the first-order approximation formulas, the close match between the model
and the sufficient statistic results reflects three facts: a) the model calibration successfully
approximates the average compositional effect D           ¯ comp , b) the non-compositional effects of
aging, D     ¯ soe D¯ comp , are relatively small, and c) the model asset demand sensitivity e   ¯ d is
           ¯ comp is calculated as in section 3, and we construct D
  46 Here, D                                                      ¯ soe by simulating the model for each country
given a fixed r0 . For each country, the semielasticities ed,c and es,c are obtained by perturbing r at a small
open economy steady state constructed with 2100 demographics, and calculating the effect on steady-state
W /Y and K /Y .



                                                      36
relatively close to that implied by proposition 4.47
     For a), the model calibration closely approximates the compositional effect because
it fits the three inputs to Dcomp in each country: we directly match the initial age profile
of income, select parameters that approximate the age profile of wealth, and feed in the
exact projected change in the age distribution.
  To understand b) and c), we sequentially shut off the forces that distinguish the full
model from the baseline model underlying the sufficient statistic result. We do this along
six rows in table 4. The first four leave the initial calibration intact but shut off dynamic
changes: first holding constant bequests received, then perceived mortality, taxes and
transfers, and retirement age.48 The last two involve changes to the steady-state cali-
bration itself, first shutting off income risk, and then replacing bequests at death with
annuities. By the final row, we have nearly recovered the baseline model, with the only
                                                                              ¯ comp .
difference being that our calibration is not flexible enough to perfectly hit D
     The e¯ d in the full model is similar to that in the baseline model, reflecting two offsetting
forces. Relative to the baseline model, the presence of bequests pushes e            ¯ d higher, since the
savings response to r can accumulate across generations (e.g. Barro 1974). The absence
of annuities pushes e       ¯ d lower, since forcing individuals to self-insure against idiosyncratic
mortality risk makes savings less sensitive to r. In table 4, after both forces are shut off by
removing bequests and introducing annuities, e            ¯ d is on net almost unchanged.
     The non-compositional effect of aging D         ¯ soe D  ¯ comp reflects three small, and partially
offsetting, demographic forces. First, bequests push up D              ¯ soe as the population is aging,
since fewer heirs split each bequest; when bequests received are kept constant, D                  ¯ soe falls
from 30.3% to 27.0%. Second, higher taxes and lower social security benefits push down
D¯ soe on net. When these are held constant and the budget is balanced solely with expen-
diture cuts, D   ¯ soe recovers from 27.1% to 30.1%. Last, the delayed retirement age pushes
down D   ¯ soe by reducing savings and increasing labor supply; when the retirement age is
kept constant, D     ¯ soe rises from 30.1% to 34.1%, and now agrees exactly with D         ¯ comp .49
     While robust to most features of the model, the close agreement of D                 ¯ soe and D   ¯ comp
does not hold when the fiscal shortfall is closed in a very one-sided way. If the entire
  47 The  ¯ s are identical across all settings since it is only a function of external parameters and moments
          e
that are targeted in the calibration.
  48 To make constant bequests received consistent with equilibrium, we assume that government

taxes/augments bequests to keep them at the initial level. For mortality, we assume that the mortality
rates perceived by individuals ex ante are held constant, while the population still evolves according to
objective mortality rates that can change over time. For all these changes to the model, we assume that
governments adjust Gt to maintain a constant debt level.
  49 The counterfactual with a constant retirement age reflects the broader point that, when population

aging adds productive "life to years" rather than "years to life" (Bloom 2019), the effects of aging on interest
rates are mitigated.


                                                      37
 A. Change in world r                                        B. Change in world W /Y
               0.00                                                                 50
                                           Model




                                                             Change in world W /Y
                                           Pure comp.
               0.25                                                                 40
 Change in r




               0.50                                                                 30

               0.75                                                                 20

               1.00                                                                 10

               1.25                                                                  0
                   2020     2040    2060    2080    2100                              2020    2040    2060         2080   2100
                                   Year                                                              Year

                          Figure 8: Transition dynamics for rates of return and wealth
Notes: This figure presents the model change in world interest rate and wealth-to-GDP between 2016 and
2100. The solid line corresponds to the model simulations from our preferred model specification and the
                                                      ¯ comp
                                                      D          W0                  ¯ s ¯ comp
dashed line to the sufficient statistic formulas Dr =  d
                                                        t
                                                           s and
                                                           e  ¯
                                                           ¯ +e
                                                                    D log W /Y = W0 de  sD
                                                                                         Y0     .    Y0 e
                                                                                                        ¯ +e
                                                                                                           ¯   t



shortfall is closed with higher taxes, less after-tax income is available for saving, and D ¯ soe
declines to 19.4%. If the entire shortfall is closed with benefit cuts, individuals must save
more to fund their own retirement, and D     ¯ soe rises to 39.1%. In our main calibration, the
shortfall is covered by an even mix of tax increases, benefit cuts, and spending cuts (which
are neutral). The absence of a large effect reflects the offsetting effects of tax and benefit
adjustments.50


Changes to net foreign asset positions. Appendix figure A.10 illustrates the model's
predictions for the change in net foreign asset positions. Almost all changes in NFAs over
time are explained by differences in Dsoe , which are in turn mainly driven by differences
in compositional effects Dcomp . However, compositional effects do not quite explain all the
variation in NFAs: although non-compositional effects Dsoe Dcomp are small on average,
they vary somewhat across countries.


Transition dynamics. We numerically solve for the transition dynamics in our extended
model, and display the resulting paths of world r and W /Y in figure 8. To test the how
well the long-run sufficient statistic formulas in propositions 2­3 work at different hori-
zons, we apply them at each date t, combining the time-varying compositional effects
    50 The
        importance of fiscal adjustment choices for macroeconomic outcomes has been discussed in the
pension reform literature (see, for example, Feldstein 1974, Auerbach and Kotlikoff 1987, and Kitao 2014).



                                                        38
¯ comp with the long-run elasticities e
D                                     ¯ d and e
                                              ¯ s . As we already know from table 4, the two
  t
series nearly coincide by 2100. Their dynamics are also quite similar, but the model pre-
dicts a somewhat faster decline in r and rise in W /Y. Both phenomena reflect the fact that
                              ¯ d overstate the short-run response of asset accumulation to
the long-run semielasticities e
interest rates. For r, this implies that interest rates have to fall more in the short run to
clear the asset market. For W /Y , this implies that asset supply is responsible for more of
the adjustment, since the supply adjustment is instantaneous in our model.
                                                      ¯ comp at different points in time can
   Overall, this exercise highlights that calculating D t
be useful to predict general equilibrium transition dynamics, although getting the exact
timing right requires a structural model.


5       Demographic change and savings rates
So far, we have analyzed demographics through the lens of stocks: wealth, capital, and
net foreign asset positions. An alternative perspective is to focus on flows: savings, in-
vestment, and the current account.
   The flow perspective has a long tradition in the literature on aging.51 One key ob-
servation in this literature is that the savings rate is hump-shaped in age, so that as the
population continues to age, the aggregate savings rate eventually declines. Observers
have made various macroeconomic predictions based on this effect: that aging will raise
interest rates (Lane 2020), decrease standards of living by impairing capital accumulation
(Bloom, Canning and Fink 2010), or exert inflationary pressure as the number of con-
sumers increases relative to the number of producers (Goodhart and Pradhan 2020).
   These predictions are not borne out in our analysis. Instead, we find that aging unam-
biguously lowers the real interest rate, thereby increasing capital intensity and output.52
A lower real interest rate also implies less inflationary pressure in any standard model in
which this pressure is captured by the natural interest rate.53
   To unpack this apparent contradiction, we return to our baseline model of section 2.
We first show that this model also predicts a negative effect of aging on savings rates
going forward, in line with the literature discussed above. To do this, we note that the
    51 See,
         e.g., Summers and Carroll (1987), Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1990), Bosworth et al. (1991), Higgins
(1998), and Lane (2020).
  52 GDP per person may still decline overall if the workforce composition effect overwhelms capital deep-

ening, but this is a separate channel that does not go through savings, as is clear from equation (8).
  53 That is, in a version of our model with nominal rigidities, if monetary policy does not fully accommo-

date the natural rate decline by lowering the intercept of its policy rule, actual inflation will decline.




                                                    39
     0
         -0.1 -0.3
                     -0.8
                            -1.2 -1.4 -1.4
     2                                     -1.7
                                                  -2.4 -2.6
                                                            -2.9 -2.9 -3.0 -3.1 -3.2
                                                                                     -3.3 -3.4 -3.6
     4                                                                                              -3.8
Y0
S0




                                                                                                           -4.3 -4.5
                                                                                                                       -5.1
Yt
St




     6
                                                                                                                              -6.1 -6.3
                                                                                                                                          -6.9
     8

                                                                                                                                                 -8.9
              U
           UN

              K

              E
             N

             N

              A

              T

              K

              R
              A

              C

              L

              T
             N

                                                                                            L
                                                                                           N
                                                                                                    LD

                                                                                                     L

                                                                                                      S
                                                                                                     X
                                                                                                                                  A

                                                                                                                                  N
                                                                                                                                   P

                                                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                  AU




                                                                                                                                ES
         SW




          PO




                                                                                         BE




                                                                                                   IR
          ES




         AU
         GB




                                                                                                  LU

                                                                                                                                IT
         GR
         DN




          SV




                                                                                                                               IN
         DE




         US




          FR
           FI
         SV




         CA



                                                                                         JP




                                                                                                                              CH
                                                                                                  N
         H




                                                                         Country

                                     Figure 9: Compositional effects and savings
Notes: Each bar shows the value of the predicted change in the savings-to-GDP ratio from the compositional
effect between 2016 and 2100 across countries, calculated using equation (21), reported in level differences.


aggregate net private savings rate in a small open economy satisfies

                                                              St   Â j p jt s j0
                                                                 µ               ,                                                                (28)
                                                              Yt   Â j p jt h j0

where s j0 is average net personal savings by age at date 0 (see appendix E for a proof).
Equation (28) shows that holding r constant, changes in the aggregate savings rate are
purely determined by compositional forces, just like with wealth-to-GDP. We can there-
fore also measure this effect using a shift-share calculation.54 Figure 9 shows the resulting
projected savings rates until 2100. These are indeed negative in all countries.55
    In panel A of figure 10, which represents steady-state equilibrium between savings
and investment, we depict this effect as a leftward shift in the private savings curve. At
first glance, this might seem to imply an increase in r, as represented by the hollow circle.
But since demographic change lowers the population growth rate and therefore g, the
other curve--representing net investment and public borrowing--also shifts left, and the
overall effect is a decline in r.
    To understand this result, it is useful to compare to panel B, which depicts steady-
state equilibrium between asset demand and supply. Here, only the asset demand curve
  54 While we could in principle perform this calculation using using measured savings rates by age, we
prefer instead to express (28) using cross-sectional profiles of assets and income alone. This avoids the
amplification of measurement error that stems from taking the difference between two large quantities,
disposable income and consumption, that are themselves observed with error.
  55 Figure A.11 shows, however, that in many countries, the effect was positive prior to 2016. This gives

some support to the common view that aging of baby boomers has pushed up savings in recent decades.



                                                                       40
 A. World equilibrium: flows                                        B. World equilibrium: stocks
 r                                                                  r
             Private savings S/Y = gW /Y                                    Asset demand W /Y
             Net investment & public borrowing gK /Y + gB/Y                 Asset supply K /Y + B/Y



                 Falling growth


                                                                                              Demographic change


                             Demog. chg.




                                                   S gK + gB                                                       W K+B
                                                   Y,   Y                                                          Y, Y


                                  Figure 10: World asset market equilibrium
Notes: This figure represents asset market equilibrium in flow space (panel A) and in stock space (panel B).
The growth rate g converts Panel B into Panel A. At given r, demographics increases W /Y and lowers g.


shifts--to the right--and the unambiguous implication is a decline in r.56 But the curves
in panel A are identical to panel B, just both multiplied by g.57 Hence, although both
curves in panel A shift left, the net investment curve shifts left by more, producing the
same decline in r as in panel B.58
    We conclude that the "flow" view of equilibrium in panel A is in principle just as valid
as the "stock" view of equilibrium in panel B, but only if we remember the effect of g on
net investment. Ignoring this effect in the context of demographic change, which can
significantly push down long-run g, may give the wrong sign for the change in r.


6       Conclusion
We project out the compositional effect of aging on the wealth-to-GDP ratio of 25 coun-
tries until the end of the twenty-first century. This effect is positive, large and hetero-
geneous across countries. According to our model, this will lead to capital deepening
everywhere, falling real interest rates, and rising net foreign asset positions in India and
    56 For
         given r, standard neoclassical theory implies that K /Y is not affected by demographic change. In
our model, B/Y is also constant. This is subject to debate, but we note that the effect of demographic change
on B/Y could take either sign: if lawmakers hold deficits gB/Y constant, B/Y will rise, but if they hold net
payments (r g) B/Y constant, it will fall.
  57 Net savings-to-GDP is S /Y = (W          Wt )/Yt . In steady state, this is S/Y = g(W /Y ), since Wt+1 =
                              t   t      t +1
(1 + g)Wt . Similarly, net investment-to-GDP is g(K /Y ) and net public borrowing-to-GDP is g( B/Y ).
  58 Goodhart and Pradhan (2020) acknowledge that investment may also fall in response to demographics,

but primarily focus on savings and argue that "savings will fall faster than investment" (p86).


                                                               41
China financed by declining asset positions in the United States. Our approach, based on
stocks rather than flows, shows why there will be no great demographic reversal.


References
Abel, Andrew B., "Will Bequests Attenuate the Predicted Meltdown in Stock Prices When Baby
 Boomers Retire?," Review of Economics and Statistics, November 2001, 83 (4), 589­595.

  , "The Effects of a Baby Boom on Stock Prices and Capital Accumulation in the Presence of
  Social Security," Econometrica, March 2003, 71 (2), 551­578.

Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo, "Secular Stagnation? The Effect of Aging on Economic
  Growth in the Age of Automation," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May 2017,
  107 (5), 174­179.

Achdou, Yves, Jiequn Han, Jean-Michel Lasry, Pierre-Louis Lions, and Benjamin Moll, "In-
  come and Wealth Distribution in Macroeconomics: A Continuous-Time Approach," Review of
  Economic Studies, April 2021.

Aguiar, Mark A., Manuel Amador, and Cristina Arellano, "Micro Risks and Pareto Improving
  Policies with Low Interest Rates," Working Paper 28996, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  July 2021.

Alvaredo, Facundo, Bertrand Garbinti, and Thomas Piketty, "On the Share of Inheritance in
  Aggregate Wealth: Europe and the USA, 1900­2010," Economica, April 2017, 84 (334), 239­260.

Ameriks, John and Stephen P. Zeldes, "How Do Household Portfolio Shares Vary with Age?,"
 Manuscript, 2004.

Atkeson, Andrew, Jonathan Heathcote, and Fabrizio Perri, "The End of Privilege: A Reexamina-
  tion of the Net Foreign Asset Position of the United States," Manuscript, July 2021.

Auclert, Adrien and Matthew Rognlie, "Inequality and Aggregate Demand," Working Paper
 24280, National Bureau of Economic Research, February 2018.

Auerbach, Alan J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Dynamic Fiscal Policy, Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
 versity Press, April 1987.

   and , "Demographics, Fiscal Policy, and U.S. Saving in the 1980s and Beyond," Tax Policy and
  the Economy, 1990, 4, 73­101.

Backus, David, Thomas Cooley, and Espen Henriksen, "Demography and Low-Frequency Cap-
  ital Flows," Journal of International Economics, April 2014, 92, S94­S102.

Bárány, Zsofia, Nicholas Coeurdacier, and Stéphane Guibaud, "Capital Flows in an Aging
  World," Manuscript, July 2019.

Barro, Robert J., "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?," Journal of Political Economy, November
  1974, 82 (6), 1095­1117.



                                              42
Bloom, David E., "The What, so What, and Now What of Population Ageing," in "Live Long and
  Prosper? The Economics of Ageing Populations," CEPR Press, 2019, pp. 8­14.

  , David Canning, and Günther Fink, "Implications of Population Ageing for Economic
  Growth," Oxford Review of Economic Policy, December 2010, 26 (4), 583­612.

  , , and Jaypee Sevilla, The Demographic Dividend: A New Perspective on the Economic Conse-
  quences of Population Change, RAND Corporation, February 2003.

Bornstein, Gideon, "Entry and Profits in an Aging Economy: The Role of Consumer Inertia,"
  Manuscript, February 2020.

Börsch-Supan, Axel, Alexander Ludwig, and Joachim Winter, "Ageing, Pension Reform and
  Capital Flows: A Multi-Country Simulation Model," Economica, June 2006, 73 (292), 625­658.

Bosworth, Barry, Gary Burtless, and John Sabelhaus, "The Decline in Saving: Evidence from
  Household Surveys," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1991, 1991 (1), 183­256.

Brülhart, Marius, Jonathan Gruber, Matthias Krapf, and Kurt Schmidheiny, "Behavioral Re-
  sponses to Wealth Taxes: Evidence from Switzerland," American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy, February 2021, forthcoming.

Cagetti, Marco, "Interest Elasticity in a Life-Cycle Model with Precautionary Savings," American
  Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May 2001, 91 (2), 418­421.

Carroll, Christopher D., "The Method of Endogenous Gridpoints for Solving Dynamic Stochastic
  Optimization Problems," Economics Letters, 2006, 91 (3), 312­320.

Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio, "Demographics and Real Interest Rates:
  Inspecting the Mechanism," European Economic Review, September 2016, 88, 208­226.

Catherine, Sylvain, Max Miller, and Natasha Sarin, "Social Security and Trends in Wealth In-
  equality," SSRN Working Paper No 3546668, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY,
  February 2020.

Coppola, Antonio, Matteo Maggiori, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger, "Redrawing the Map
  of Global Capital Flows: The Role of Cross-Border Financing and Tax Havens," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, August 2021, 136 (3), 1499­1556.

Cutler, David M., James M. Poterba, Louise M. Sheiner, Lawrence H. Summers, and George A.
  Akerlof, "An Aging Society: Opportunity or Challenge?," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
  1990, 1990 (1), 1­73.

Deaton, Angus, The Analysis of Household Surveys a Microeconometric Approach to Development Pol-
 icy, Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997.

Domeij, David and Martin Flodén, "Population Aging and International Capital Flows," Interna-
 tional Economic Review, July 2006, 47 (3), 1013­1032.

Eggertsson, Gauti B., Jacob A. Robbins, and Ella Getz Wold, "Kaldor and Piketty's Facts: The
  Rise of Monopoly Power in the United States," Working Paper 24287, National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research, February 2018.

                                              43
  , Neil R. Mehrotra, and Jacob A. Robbins, "A Model of Secular Stagnation: Theory and Quan-
  titative Evaluation," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, January 2019, 11 (1), 1­48.

Evans, Owen J., "Tax Policy, the Interest Elasticity of Saving, and Capital Accumulation: Numer-
  ical Analysis of Theoretical Models," American Economic Review, June 1983, 73 (3), 398­410.

Farhi, Emmanuel and François Gourio, "Accounting for Macro-Finance Trends: Market Power,
  Intangibles, and Risk Premia," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, November 2018, 2018
  (Fall).

Feldstein, Martin, "Social Security, Induced Retirement, and Aggregate Capital Accumulation,"
  Journal of Political Economy, September 1974, 82 (5), 905­926.

  , "The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation," Journal of Political Economy, April 1978, 86 (2),
  S29­S51.

Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David López-Salido, "Understanding the New
 Normal: The Role of Demographics," IMF Economic Review, March 2021.

Geanakoplos, John, Michael Magill, and Martine Quinzii, "Demography and the Long-Run
 Predictability of the Stock Market," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2004, 2004 (1), 241­
 307.

Gomme, Paul, B. Ravikumar, and Peter Rupert, "The Return to Capital and the Business Cycle,"
 Review of Economic Dynamics, April 2011, 14 (2), 262­278.

Goodhart, Charles and Manoj Pradhan, The Great Demographic Reversal: Ageing Societies, Waning
 Inequality, and an Inflation Revival, 1st ed., Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan, August
 2020.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Hélène Rey, "International Financial Adjustment," Journal of Po-
 litical Economy, August 2007, 115 (4), 665­703.

Hall, Robert E., "Technical Change and Capital from the Point of View of the Dual," Review of
 Economic Studies, 1968, 35 (1), 35­46.

Havránek, Tomás, "Measuring Intertemporal Substitution: The Importance of Method Choices
 and Selective Reporting," Journal of the European Economic Association, December 2015, 13 (6),
 1180­1204.

Henriksen, Espen R., "A Demographic Explanation of U.S. and Japanese Current Account Behav-
 ior," Manuscript, December 2002.

Higgins, Matthew, "Demography, National Savings, and International Capital Flows," Interna-
  tional Economic Review, 1998, 39 (2), 343­369.

Hurd, Michael and James P. Smith, "Expected Bequests and Their Distribution," Working Paper
 9142, National Bureau of Economic Research, September 2002.

Imrohoro
          glu, Ay¸               
                  se, Selahattin Imrohoro glu, and Douglas H. Joines, "A Life Cycle Analysis of
  Social Security," Economic Theory, February 1995, 6 (1), 83­114.


                                                44
Jakobsen, Katrine, Kristian Jakobsen, Henrik Kleven, and Gabriel Zucman, "Wealth Taxation
  and Wealth Accumulation: Theory and Evidence From Denmark," Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, February 2020, 135 (1), 329­388.

Jones, Callum, "Aging, Secular Stagnation and the Business Cycle," Manuscript, February 2018.

Karabarbounis, Loukas and Brent Neiman, "The Global Decline of the Labor Share," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, February 2014, 129 (1), 61­103.

Kitao, Sagiri, "Sustainable Social Security: Four Options," Review of Economic Dynamics, October
  2014, 17 (4), 756­779.

Kleven, Henrik and Esben Schultz, "Estimating Taxable Income Responses Using Danish Tax
  Reforms," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, November 2014, 6 (4), 271­301.

Kopecky, Joseph and Alan M. Taylor, "The Murder-Suicide of the Rentier: Population Aging and
  the Risk Premium," Working Paper 26943, National Bureau of Economic Research, April 2020.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., Kent Smetters, and Jan Walliser, "Privatizing Social Security in the United
  States--Comparing the Options," Review of Economic Dynamics, July 1999, 2 (3), 532­574.

Krueger, Dirk and Alexander Ludwig, "On the Consequences of Demographic Change for Rates
  of Returns to Capital, and the Distribution of Wealth and Welfare," Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics, January 2007, 54 (1), 49­87.

Krusell, Per and Anthony A. Smith, "Is Piketty's "Second Law of Capitalism" Fundamental?,"
  Journal of Political Economy, August 2015, 123 (4), 725­748.

Kuhn, Moritz, Moritz Schularick, and Ulrike I. Steins, "Income and Wealth Inequality in Amer-
 ica, 1949­2016," Journal of Political Economy, March 2020, 128 (9), 3469­3519.

Lane, Phillip, "International Inflation Co-Movements," Speech at the Inflation: Drivers and Dynam-
  ics 2020 Online Conference, May 2020, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland/European Central Bank.

Lee, Ronald D., "Population Age Structure, Intergenerational Transfer, and Wealth: A New Ap-
  proach, with Applications to the United States," The Journal of Human Resources, 1994, 29 (4),
  1027­1063.

Lisack, Noëmie, Rana Sajedi, and Gregory Thwaites, "Demographic Trends and the Real Interest
  Rate," Manuscript, December 2017.

Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen J. Mullen, and David Powell, "The Effect of Population Aging on
 Economic Growth, the Labor Force and Productivity," Working Paper 22452, National Bureau
 of Economic Research, July 2016.

Mankiw, N. Gregory and David N. Weil, "The Baby Boom, the Baby Bust, and the Housing
 Market," Regional Science and Urban Economics, May 1989, 19 (2), 235­258.

Moll, Benjamin, Lukasz Rachel, and Pascual Restrepo, "Uneven Growth: Automation's Impact
 on Income and Wealth Inequality," Working Paper 28440, National Bureau of Economic Re-
 search, February 2021.


                                                45
Nardi, Mariacristina De, "Wealth Inequality and Intergenerational Links," Review of Economic
 Studies, 2004, 71 (3), 743­768.

  , Eric French, and John B. Jones, "Why Do the Elderly Save? The Role of Medical Expenses,"
  Journal of Political Economy, February 2010, 118 (1), 39­75.

  , , John Bailey Jones, and Rory McGee, "Why Do Couples and Singles Save During Retire-
  ment?," Working Paper 28828, National Bureau of Economic Research, May 2021.

  , Selahattin Imrohoroglu,
                            and Thomas J. Sargent, "Saving and Pension Reform in General
  Equilibrium Models," Oxford Review of Economic Policy, March 2001, 17 (1), 20­39.

Oberfield, Ezra and Devesh Raval, "Micro Data and Macro Technology," Econometrica, 2021, 89
 (2), 703­732.

Papetti, Andrea, "Demographics and the Natural Real Interest Rate: Historical and Projected
  Paths for the Euro Area," SSRN Working Paper No 3363512, March 2019.

Penn Wharton Budget Model, "Penn Wharton Budget Model: Dynamic OLG Model," Technical
  Report, May 2019.

Peters, Michael and Conor Walsh, "Declining Dynamism, Increasing Markups and Missing
  Growth: The Role of the Labor Force," Manuscript, November 2019.

Piketty, Thomas, Capital in the Twenty-First Century, 1st ed., Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, March
  2014.

  and Gabriel Zucman, "Capital is Back: Wealth-Income Ratios in Rich Countries 1700­2010,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2014, 129 (3), 1255­1310.

Poterba, James M., "Demographic Structure and Asset Returns," Review of Economics and Statistics,
  November 2001, 83 (4), 565­584.

Rachel, Lukasz and Lawrence H. Summers, "On Secular Stagnation in the Industrialized World,"
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2019, pp. 1­54.

  and Thomas Smith, "Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate," Bank of England Staff
  Working Paper No. 571, December 2015.

Sabelhaus, John and Alice Henriques Volz, "Are Disappearing Employer Pensions Contributing
  to Rising Wealth Inequality?," FEDS Notes No 2019-02-01, February 2019.

   and , "Social Security Wealth, Inequality, and Lifecycle Saving," Working Paper 27110, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research, May 2020.

Saez, Emmanuel and Stefanie Stantcheva, "A Simpler Theory of Optimal Capital Taxation," Jour-
  nal of Public Economics, June 2018, 162, 120­142.

Solow, Robert M., "A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth," Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, February 1956, 70 (1), 65­94.

Straub, Ludwig, "Consumption, Savings, and the Distribution of Permanent Income," Manuscript,
  June 2019.

                                               46
Summers, Lawrence H., "Capital Taxation and Accumulation in a Life Cycle Growth Model,"
  American Economic Review, September 1981, 71 (4), 533­544.

   and Christopher D. Carroll, "Why is U.S. National Saving so Low?," Brookings Papers on Eco-
  nomic Activity, 1987, 1987 (2), 607­642.

Willis, Robert J., "Life Cycles, Institutions, and Population Growth: A Theory of the Equilibrium
 Interest Rate in an Overlapping Generations Model," in W. Brian Arthur and Gerry Rodgers,
 eds., Economics of changing age distributions in Developed Countries, Oxford University Press, 1988,
 pp. 106­138.

Young, Eric R., "Solving the Incomplete Markets Model with Aggregate Uncertainty Using the
  Krusell­Smith Algorithm and Non-Stochastic Simulations," Journal of Economic Dynamics and
  Control, January 2010, 34 (1), 36­41.

Zoutman, Floris T., "The Elasticity of Taxable Wealth:          Evidence from the Netherlands,"
  Manuscript, November 2018.

Zucman, Gabriel, "The Missing Wealth of Nations: Are Europe and the U.S. net Debtors or net
  Creditors?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, April 2013.




                                                 47
